Project Gutenberg's Minnie's Sacrifice, by Frances Ellen Watkins Harper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Minnie's Sacrifice

Author: Frances Ellen Watkins Harper

Release Date: February 12, 2004 [EBook #11053]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINNIE'S SACRIFICE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Andrea Ball and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





Transcriber's Note: This document is the text of Minnie's Sacrifice. Any
                    bracketed notations such as [Text missing], [?], and
                    those inserting letters or other comments are from
                    the original text.

Transcriber's Note About the Author:
Francis Ellen Watkins Harper (1825-1911) was born to free parents in
Baltimore, Maryland. Orphaned at three, she was raised by her uncle, a
teacher and radical advocate for civil rights. She attended the Academy
for Negro Youth and was educated as a teacher. She became a professional
lecturer, activist, suffragette, poet, essayist, novelist, and the author
of the first published short story written by an African-American. Her
work spanned more than sixty years.




MINNIE'S SACRIFICE

A Rediscovered Novel by

Frances E.W. Harper

Edited By Frances Smith Foster






Chapter I


Miriam sat in her lowly cabin, painfully rocking her body to and fro;
for a great sorrow had fallen upon her life. She had been the mother of
three children, two had died in their infancy, and now her last, her
loved and only child was gone, but not like the rest, who had passed
away almost as soon as their little feet had touched the threshold of
existence. She had been entangled in the mazes of sin and sorrow; and
her sun had gone down in darkness. It was the old story. Agnes, fair,
young and beautiful, had been a slave, with no power to protect herself
from the highest insults that brutality could offer to innocence. Bound
hand and foot by that system, which has since gone down in wrath, and
blood, and tears, she had fallen a victim to the wiles and power of her
master; and the result was the introduction of a child of shame into a
world of sin and suffering; for herself an early grave; and for her
mother a desolate and breaking heart.

While Miriam was sitting down hopelessly beneath the shadow of her
mighty grief, gazing ever and anon on the pale dead face, which seemed
to bear in its sad but gentle expression, an appeal from earth to
heaven, some of the slaves would hurry in, and looking upon the fair
young face, would drop a word of pity for the weeping mother, and then
hurry on to their appointed tasks. All day long Miriam sat alone with
her dead, except when these kindly interruptions broke upon the monotony
of her sorrow.

In the afternoon, Camilla, the only daughter of her master, entered her
cabin, and throwing her arms around her neck exclaimed, "Oh! Mammy, I am
so sorry I didn't know Agnes was dead. I've been on a visit to Mr. Le
Grange's plantation, and I've just got back this afternoon, and as soon
as I heard that Agnes was dead I hurried to see you. I would not even
wait for my dinner. Oh! how sweet she looks," said Camilla, bending over
the corpse, "just as natural as life. When did she die?"

"This morning, my poor, dear darling!" And another burst of anguish
relieved the overcharged heart.

"Oh! Mammy, don't cry, I am so sorry; but what is this?" said she, as
the little bundle of flannel began to stir.

"That is poor Agnes' baby."

"Agnes' baby? Why, I didn't know that Agnes had a baby. Do let me see
it?"

Tenderly the grandmother unfolded the wrappings, and presented the
little stranger. He was a beautiful babe, whose golden hair, bright blue
eyes and fair complexion showed no trace of the outcast blood in his
veins.

"Oh, how beautiful!" said Camilla; "surely this can't be Agnes' baby. He
is just as white as I am, and his eyes--what a beautiful blue--and his
hair, why it is really lovely."

"He is very pretty, Miss, but after all he is only a slave."

A slave. She had heard that word before; but somehow, when applied to
that fair child, it grated harshly on her ear; and she said, "Well, I
think it is a shame for him to be a slave, when he is just as white as
anybody. Now, Mammy," said she, throwing off her hat, and looking
soberly into the fire, "if I had my way, he should never be a slave."

"And why can't you have your way? I'm sure master humors you in
everything."

"I know that; Pa does everything I wish him to do; but I don't know how
I could manage about this. If his mother were living, I would beg Pa to
set them both free, and send them North; but his mother is gone; and,
Mammy, we couldn't spare you. And besides, it is so cold in the North,
you would freeze to death, and yet, I can't bear the thought of his
being a slave. I wonder," said she, musing to herself, "I wonder if I
couldn't save him from being a slave. Now I have it," she said, rising
hastily, her face aglow with pleasurable excitement. "I was reading
yesterday a beautiful story in the Bible about a wicked king, who wanted
to kill all the little boys of a people who were enslaved in his land,
and how his mother hid her child by the side of a river, and that the
king's daughter found him and saved his life. It was a fine story; and I
read it till I cried. Now I mean to do something like that good
princess. I am going to ask Pa, to let me take him to the house, and
have a nurse for him, and bring him up like a white child, and never let
him know that he is colored."

Miriam shook her head doubtfully; and Camilla, looking disappointed,
said, "Don't you like my plan?"

"Laws, honey, it would be fustrate, but your Pa wouldn't hear to it."

"Yes, he would, Mammy, because I'll tell him I've set my heart upon it,
and won't be satisfied if he don't consent. I know if I set my heart
upon it, he won't refuse me, because he always said he hates to see me
fret. Why, Mammy, he bought me two thousand dollars worth of jewelry
when we were in New York, just because I took a fancy to a diamond set
which I saw at Tiffany's. Anyhow, I am going to ask him." Eager and
anxious to carry out her plan, Camilla left the cabin to find her
father. He was seated in his library, reading Homer. He looked up, as
her light step fell upon the threshold, and said playfully, "What is
your wish, my princess? Tell me, if it is the half of my kingdom."

Encouraged by his manner, she drew near, perched upon his knee, and
said; "Now, you must keep your word, Pa. I have a request to make, but
you must first promise me that you will grant it."

"But I don't know what it is. I can't tell. You might want me to put my
head in the fire."

"Oh no, Pa, you know I don't!"

"Well, you might wish me to run for Congress."

"Oh no, Pa, I know that you hate politics."

"Well, darling, what is your request?"

"No; tell me first that you will grant it. Now, don't tease me, Pa; say
yes, and I will tell you."

"Well, yes; if it is anything in reason."

"Well, it is in reason, let me tell you, Pa. To-day, after I came home,
I asked Annette where was Agnes, and she told me she was dead. Oh I was
so sorry; and so before I got my dinner I hastened to Mammy's cabin, and
found poor Mammy almost heart-broken, and Agnes lying dead, but looking
just as natural as life."

"She was dead, but had left one of the dearest little babies I ever saw.
Why, Pa, he is just as white as we are; and I told Mammy so, but she
said it didn't matter; 'he is a poor slave, just like the rest of us.'
Now, Pa, I don't want Agnes' baby to be a slave. Can't you keep him from
growing up a slave?"

"How am I to do that, my little Abolitionist?"

"No, Pa, I am not an Abolitionist. I heard some of them talk when I was
in New York, and I think they are horrid creatures; but, Pa, this child
is so white, nobody would ever know that he had one drop of Negro blood
in his veins. Couldn't we take him out of that cabin, and make all the
servants promise that they would never breathe a word about his being
colored, and let me bring him up as a white child?"

"Well," said Mr. Le Croix, bursting into a hearty laugh, "that is a
capital joke; my little dewdrop talk of bringing up a child! Why,
darling, you would tire of him in a week."

"Oh no, Pa, I wouldn't! Just try me; if it is only for a week."

"Why, Sunbeam, it is impossible. Who ever heard of such a thing as a
Negro being palmed upon society as a white person?"

"Negro! Pa, he is just as white as you are, and his eyes are as blue as
mine."

"Still he belongs to the Negro race; and one drop of that blood in his
veins curses all the rest. I would grant you anything in reason, but
this is not to be thought of. Were I to do so I would immediately lose
caste among all the planters in the neighborhood; I would be set down as
an Abolitionist, and singled out for insult and injury. Ask me anything,
Camilla, but that."

"Oh, Pa, what do you care about social position? You never hunt, nor
entertain company, nor take any part in politics. You shut yourself up
in your library, year after year, and pore over your musty books, and
hardly any one knows whether you are dead or alive. And I am sure that
we could hide the secret of his birth, and pass him off as the orphan
child of one of our friends, and that will be the truth; for Agnes was
our friend; at least I know she was mine."

"Well, I'll see about it; now, get down, and let me finish reading this
chapter."

The next day Camilla went again to the cabin of Miriam; but the overseer
had set her to a task in the field, and Agnes' baby was left to the care
of an aged woman who was too old to work in the fields, but not being
entirely past service, she was appointed as one of the nurses for the
babies and young children, while their mothers were working in the
fields.

Camilla, feeling an unusual interest in the child, went to the
overseer, and demanded that Miriam should be released from her tasks,
and permitted to attend the child.

In vain the overseer plead the pressure for hands, and the busy season.
Camilla said it did not matter, she wanted Miriam, and she would have
her; and he, feeling that it was to his interest to please the little
lady, had Miriam sent from the field to Camilla.

"Mammy, I want you to come to the house. I want you to come and be my
Mammy. Agnes is dead; your husband is gone, and I want you to come and
bring the baby to the house, and I am going to get him some beautiful
dresses, and some lovely coral I saw in New Orleans, and I am going to
dress him so handsomely, that I believe Pa will feel just as I do, and
think it a shame that such a beautiful child should be a slave."

Camilla went home, and told her father what she had done. And he,
willing to compromise with her, readily consented; and in a day or two
the child and his grandmother were comfortably ensconced in their new
quarters.

The winter passed; the weeks ripened into months, and the months into
years, and the child under the pleasant dispensations of love and
kindness grew to be a fine, healthy, and handsome boy.

One day, when Mr. Le Croix was in one of his most genial moods, Camilla
again introduced the subject which she had concealed, but not abandoned.

"Now, father, I do think it is a shame for this child to be a slave,
when he is just as white as anybody; I am sure we could move away from
here to France, and you could adopt him as your son, and no one would
know anything of his birth and parentage. He is so beautiful, I would
like him for my brother; and he looks like us anyhow."

Le Croix flushed deep at these words, and he looked keenly into his
daughter's face; but her gaze was so open, her expression so frank and
artless, he could not think that her words had any covert meaning in
reference to the paternity of the child; but to save that child from
being a slave, and to hide his origin was with her a pet scheme; and, to
use her own words, "she had set her heart upon it."




Chapter II


Mr. Bernard Le Croix was the only son of a Spanish lady, and a French
gentleman, who were married in Hayti a few months before the revolution,
which gave freedom to the Island, and made Hayti an independent nation.

His father, foreseeing the storm which was overshadowing the land,
contrived to escape, bringing with him a large amount of personal
property; and preferring a climate similar to his own, he bought a
plantation on Red river, and largely stocked it with slaves. Only one
child blessed their union; Bernard Le Croix, who grew up sensitive, shy
and retiring, with a taste for solitude and literary pursuits.

During the troubles in Hayti, his uncle and only daughter escaped from
the Island, leaving every thing behind except the clothing upon their
persons, and a few jewels they had hastily collected. Broken in spirits,
feeble in health, Louis Le Croix reached Louisiana, only to die in his
brother's arms and to leave his orphan daughter to his care. She was
about ten years old and Bernard was twelve, and in their childhood was
commenced a friendship which ripened into love and marriage. Bernard's
father and mother lived long enough to see their first and only
grandchild, and then died, leaving their son a large baronial estate,
500 slaves, and a vast amount of money.

Passionately fond of literature, aesthetic in his tastes, he devoted
himself to poetry and the ancient classics; filled his home with the
finest paintings and the most beautiful statuary, and had his gardens
laid out in the most exquisite manner. And into that beautiful home he
brought his young and lovely bride; but in that fair house where velvet
carpets hushed her tread, and magnificence surrounded her path, she
drooped and faded. Day by day her cheek grew paler, her footsteps
slower, until she passed away like a thing of love and light, and left
her heart-broken husband and a child of six summers to mourn her loss.

Bernard, ever shy and sensitive, grew more so after the death of his
wife. He sought no society; seemed to lose all interest in politics; and
secluded himself in his library till he had almost passed from the
recollection of his nearest neighbors. He superintended the education of
his daughter, because he could not bear the thought of being separated
from her. And she, seeing very little of society, and reading only from
the best authors, both ancient and modern, was growing up with very
little knowledge of the world, except what she learned from books.

Without any female relatives to guide her, she had no other associates
than the servants of her household, and the family of Mr. Le Grange. Her
mother's nurse and favorite servant had taken the charge of her after
her death, and Agnes had been her nurse and companion.

Camilla, although [adored?] and petted by every one, and knowing no law
but her own will, was still a very lovely child. Her father, wrapped in
his literary pursuits, had left the entire control of his plantation to
overseers, in whom he trusted almost implicitly. And many a tale of
wrong and sorrow came to the ear of Camilla; for these simple-minded
people had learned to love her, and to trust in her as an angel of
mercy. Often would she interfere in their behalf, and tell the story of
their wrongs to her father. And at her instance, more than one overseer
had been turned away; which, coming to the ears of others, made them
cautious how they offended the little lady, for young as she was they
soon learned that she had great influence with her ease-loving father,
who would comply with almost any fancy or request rather than see her
unhappy or fretting.

And Camilla, knowing her power, insisted that Agnes' child should be
raised as a white child, and the secret of his birth effectually
concealed. At first, Mr. Le Croix thought it was a passing whim that she
would soon forget; that the child would amuse and interest her for
awhile; and then she would tire of him as she had of other things; such
as her birds, her squirrel, and even her Shetland pony. But when he
found that instead of her intention being a passing whim it was a
settled purpose, he made up his mind to accede to her wishes.

His plan was to take the child North, to have him educated, and then
adopt him as his son. And in fact the plan rather suited him; for then
he could care for him as a son, without acknowledging the relationship.
And being a member of two nations having a Latin basis, he did not feel
the same pride of race and contempt and repulsion for weaker races which
characterizes the proud and imperious Anglo-Saxon.

The next Summer Mr. Le Croix took a journey to the North, taking Louis
and Camilla with him. He found a very pleasant family school in New
England; and having made suitable arrangements, he left Louis in the
care of the matron, whose kindness and attentions soon won the child's
heart; and before he left the North, Louis seemed perfectly contented
with his new home.

Camilla was delighted with her tour; the constant companion of her
father, she visited with him every place of amusement or interest they
could find. She was much pleased with the factories; and watched with
curious eyes the intelligent faces of the operatives, as they plied with
ready fingers their daily tasks. Sometimes she would contrast their
appearance with the laborers she had seen wending their way into their
lowly huts; and then her face would grow sober even to sadness. A
puzzled expression would flit over her countenance, as if she were
trying to solve a problem which was inexplicable to her.

One day on the hunt for some new excitement, her father passed down
Tremont St., and saw advertised, in large letters, on the entrance to
Tremont Temple, "Anti Slavery Meeting;" and never having been in such a
place before he entered, impelled by a natural curiosity to hear what
could be said against a system in which he had been involved from his
earliest recollections, without taking the pains to examine it.

The first speaker was a colored man. This rather surprised him. He had
been accustomed to colored men all the days of his life; and as such, he
had known some of them to be intelligent, shrewd, and wide awake; but
this was a new experience. The man had been a slave, and recounted in
burning words the wrongs which had been heaped upon him. He told that he
had been a husband and a father: that his wife had possessed (for a
slave) the "fatal gift of beauty;" that a trader, from whose presence
her soul had recoiled with loathing, had marked her as his prey. Then he
told how he had knelt at his master's feet, and implored him not to sell
her, but it was all in vain. The trader was rich in sin-cursed gold; and
he was poor and weak. He next attempted to describe his feelings when he
saw his wife and children standing on the auction block; and heard the
coarse jests of the spectators, and the fierce competition of the
bidders.

The speaker made a deep impression upon the minds of the audience; and
even Le Croix, who had been accustomed to slavery all his life, felt a
sense of guilt passing over him for his complicity in the system; whilst
Camilla grew red and pale by turns, and clutching her little hands
nervously together, said, "Father, let us go home."

Le Croix saw the deep emotion on his daughter's face, and the nervous
twitchings of her lips, and regretted that he had introduced her to such
an exciting scene.

When they were seated in their private parlor, Le Croix said: "Birdie,
I am sorry that we attended that meeting this morning. I didn't believe
a word that nigger said; and yet these people all drank it down as if
every word were gospel truth. They are a set of fanatics, calculated to
keep the nation in hot water. I hope that you will never enter such a
place again. Did you believe one word that negro said?"

"Why, yes, Pa, I did, because our Isaac used to tell me just such a
story as that. If I had shut my eyes, I could have imagined that it was
Isaac telling his story."

"Isaac! What business had Isaac telling you any such stories?"

"Oh, Pa, don't get angry with Isaac. It wasn't his fault; it was mine.

"You know when you brought him home to drive the carriage, he used to
look so sorrowful, and I said to him one day, Isaac, what makes you so
sad? Why don't you laugh and talk, like Jerry and Sam?

"And he said, 'Oh Missus, I can't! Ise got a mighty heap of trouble on
my mind.' And he looked so down-hearted when he said this, I wanted to
know what was the matter; but he said, 'It won't do, for a little lady
like you to know the troubles of we poor creatures,' but one day, when
Sam came home from New Orleans he brought him a letter from his wife,
and he really seemed to be overjoyed, and he kissed the letter, and put
it in his bosom, and I never saw him look half so happy before. So the
next day when I asked him to get the pony ready, he asked me if I
wouldn't read it for him. He said he had been trying to make it out, but
somehow he could not get the hang of the words, and so I sat down and
read it to him. Then he told me about his wife, how beautiful she was;
and how a trader, a real mean man, wanted to buy her, and that he had
begged his master not to sell her; but it was no use. She had to go; but
he was glad of one thing; the trader was dead, and his wife had got a
place in the city with a very nice lady, and he hoped to see her when
he went to New Orleans. Pa, I wonder how slavery came to be. I should
hate to belong to anybody, wouldn't you, Pa?"

"Why, yes, darling, but then the negroes are contented, and wouldn't
take their freedom, if you would give it to them."

"I don't know about that, Pa; there was Mr. Le Grange's Peter. Mr. Le
Grange used to dress him so fine and treat him so well that he thought
no one would ever tempt Peter to leave him; and he came North with him
every year for three or four summers, and he always made out that he was
afraid of the abolitionists--bobolitionists he used to call them--and
Mr. Le Grange just believed that Peter was in earnest, and somehow he
got Mrs. Le Grange to bring his wife North to wait on her. And when they
both got here, they both left; and Mrs. Le Grange had to wait on
herself, until she got another servant. She told me she had got enough
of the North, and never wanted to see it again so long as she lived;
that she wouldn't have taken three thousand dollars for them."

"Well, darling, they would have never left, if these meddlesome
abolitionists hadn't put it in their heads; but, darling, don't bother
your brain about such matters. See what I have bought you this morning,"
said he, handing her a necklace of the purest pearls; "here, darling, is
a birth-day present for you." Camilla took the necklace, and gazing
absently upon it said, "I can't understand it."

"What is it, my little philosopher, that you can't understand?"

"Pa, I can't understand slavery; that man made me think it was something
very bad. Do you think it can be right?"

Le Croix's face flushed suddenly, and he bit his lip, but said nothing,
and commenced reading the paper.

"Why don't you answer me, Pa?" Le Croix's brow grew darker, but he tried
to conceal his vexation, and quietly said, "Darling, never mind. Don't
puzzle your little head about matters you cannot understand, and which
our wisest statesmen cannot solve."

Camilla said no more, but a new train of thought had been awakened. She
had lived so much among the slaves, and had heard so many tales of
sorrow breathed confidentially into her ears, that she had unconsciously
imbibed their view of the matter; and without comprehending the
injustice of the system, she had learned to view it from their
standpoint of observation.

What she had seen of slavery in the South had awakened her sympathy and
compassion. What she had heard of it in the North had aroused her sense
of justice. She had seen the old system under a new light. The good seed
was planted, which was yet to yield its harvest of blessed deeds.




Chapter III


"What is the matter?" said St. Pierre Le Grange, as he entered suddenly
the sitting-room of his wife, Georgietta Le Grange, and saw her cutting
off the curls from the head of little girl about five years old, the
child of a favorite slave.

"Matter enough!" said the angry wife, her cheeks red with excitement and
her eyes half blinded with tears of vexation. "This child shan't stay
here; and if she does, she shall never again be taken for mine."

"Who took her for yours? What has happened that has brought about all
this excitement?"

"Just wait a minute," said Georgietta, trying to frame her excitement
into words.

"Yesterday I invited the Le Fevres and the Le Counts, and a Northern
lady they had stopping with Mrs. Le Fevre, to dine with us. To-day I
told Ellen to have the servants all cleaned up, and looking as well as
possible; and so I distributed around more than a dozen turbans, for I
wanted Mrs. King to see how much better and happier our negroes looked
here than they do when they are free in the North, and what should Ellen
do but dress up her little minx in her best clothes, and curl her hair
and let her run around in the front yard."

"So she overdid the thing," said Le Grange, beginning to comprehend the
trouble.

"Yes, she did, but she will never do it again," exclaimed Mrs. Le
Grange, her dark eyes flashing defiantly.

Le Grange bit his lip, but said nothing. He saw the storm that was
brewing, and about to fall on the head of the hapless child and mother,
and thought that he would do nothing to increase it.

"When Mrs. Le Fevre," continued Georgietta, "alighted from the carriage,
she noticed the child, and calling the attention of the whole party to
her, said, 'Oh, how beautiful she is! The very image of her father.'
'Mrs. Le Grange,' said she, after passing the compliments of the day, 'I
congratulate you on having such a beautiful child. She is the very image
of her father. And how large she is for her age.' Just then Marie came
to the door and said 'She's not my sister, that is Ellen's child.' I saw
the gentlemen exchange glances, and the young ladies screw up their
mouths to hide their merriment, while Mrs. Le Fevre, with all her
obtuseness, seemed to comprehend the blunder, and she said, 'Child, you
must excuse me, for my poor old eyes are getting so good for nothing I
can hardly tell one person from the other.' I blundered some kind of
answer, I hardly know what I said. I was almost ready to die with
vexation; but this shall never happen again."

"What are you going to do?"

"You see what I have begun to do. I am going to have all this curling
business broken up, and I am going to have her dressed in domestic, like
the other little niggers. I'll let Ellen know that I am mistress here;
and as soon as a trader comes along I mean to sell her. I want a new set
of pearls anyhow."

Le Grange made no reply. He was fond of the child, but knowing what a
termagant his wife was, he thought that silence like discretion was the
better part of valor, and hastily beat a retreat from her presence.

"Take these curls and throw them away," said Mrs. Le Grange to Sally,
her waiting-maid. "Move quick, and take this child into the kitchen, and
don't let me see her in the front yard again. Do you hear what I say?"
said Georgiette in a sharp, shrill tone. "Don't you let me see that
child in the front yard again. Here, before you go, darken this room,
and let me see if I can get any rest. I am so nervous, I am almost ready
to fly."

Sally did as she was bidden; and taking the child to the kitchen,
exclaimed to Milly, the cook, "Hi! Oh! there's been high times upstairs
to-day."

"What's the matter?" said Milly, wiping the dough from her hands, and
turning her face to Sally.

"Oh! Missus mad 'bout Ellen's child. She's mad as a March hare. See how
she's cut all her hair off."

"A debil," said Milly. "What did she do dat for? She is allers up to
some debilment. What did that poor innercence child do to her? I wonder
what she'll get at next!"

"I don't know, but to-day when Mrs. Le Ferre come'd here she kissed the
child, and said it was the very image of its father, and Missus just
looked mad enough to run her through."

Milly, in spite of her indignation could not help laughing. "Well,
that's a good joke. I guess Missus' high as ninety. What did Massa say?"

"He neber said a word; he looked like he'd been stealin' a sheep; and
Missus she jist cut up high, and said she was going to keep her hair cut
short, and have her dressed in domestic, and kept in the kitchen, and
when she got a good chance she meant to sell her, for she wanted a new
set of pearls anyhow. Massa neber said beans. I jist b'lieve he's
feared of her. She's sich a mity piece. I spect some night the debil
will come and fly way wid her. I hope so anyhow."

To which not very pious wish Milly replied, "I am fraid there is no such
good luck. Nothin' don't s'prise me that Miss Georgiette does 'cause
she's a chip off the old block. Her mother's poor niggers used to be cut
up and slashed all the time; for she was a horse at the mill. De debil
was in dat woman big as a sheep. Dere was Nancy, my fellow servant;
somehow she got a spite agin Nancy's husban', said he shouldn't come
dere any more. Pore Nancy, her and Andy war libing together in dar nice
little cabin, and Nancy did keep ebery ting shinin' like a new pin,
'cause she would work so hard when she was done her task for Missus. But
one day Missus got de debil in her, and sayed Andy shouldn't come der
any more, and she jist had all Nancy's tings took out de cabin and shut
it up, and made her come and sleep in de house. Pore Nancy, she cried as
if her heart would break right in two; and she says why does you take my
husban' from me? and Missus said I did it to please my own self, and den
Nancy kneeled at her feet and said, 'Missus I'll get up before day and
set up till twelve or one o'clock at night and work for you, but please
don't take me from my husban'. An' what do you think ole Missus did? Why
she jist up wid her foot and kicked Nancy in de mouf, and knocked out
two of her teef. I seed her do it wid my own blessed eyes. An' I sed to
myself de debil will never git his own till he gits you. Well she did
worry dat pore cretur almost to death. She used to make her sleep in the
room wid her chillen, and locked de door ebery night, and Sundays she'd
lebe some one to watch her, she was so fraid she'd git to see her
husban'. An' dis Miss Georgiette is de very moral of her Ma, and she's
jist as big as a spitfire."

"Hush," said Milly, "here comes Jane. Don't say no more 'bout Missus,
cause she's real white people's nigger, and tells all she knows, and
what she don't."




Chapter IV


"I am really sorry, Ellen, but I can't help it. Georgiette has taken a
dislike to the child, and there is no living in peace with her unless I
sell the child or take it away."

"Oh! Mr. St. Pierre, you would not sell that child when it is your own
flesh and blood?" Le Grange winced under these words.

"No, Ellen, I'll never consent to sell the child, but it won't do for
her to stay here. I've made up my mind to send her North, and have her
educated."

"And then I'll never see my darling any more."

"But, Ellen, that is better than having her here to be knocked around by
Georgiette, and if I die to be sold as a slave. It is the best thing I
can do,--hang old Mrs. Le Fevre's tongue; but I guess it would have come
out some time or the other. I just tell you what I'll do, Ellen. I'll
take the child down to New Orleans, and make out to Georgiette that I am
going to sell her, but instead of that, I'll get a friend of mine who is
going to Pennsylvania to take her with him, and have her boarded there,
and educated. Nobody need know anything about her being colored. I'd
send you both, Ellen, but, to tell you the truth, the plantation is
running down, and the crops are so short this year I can't afford it;
but when times get better, I'll send you up there and tell you where you
can find her."

"Well, Mr. St. Pierre, that is better than having Missus knocking her
around or selling her to one of those old mean nigger traders, and never
having a chance to see my darling no more. But, Mr. St. Pierre, before
you take her away won't you please give me her likeness? Maybe I won't
know her when I see her again."

Le Grange consented, and when he went to the city again he told his wife
he was going to sell the child.

"I am glad of it," said Georgiette. "I would have her mother sold, but
we can't spare her; she is so handy with her needle, and does all the
cutting out on the place."




Le Grange's Plan


"The whole fact is this Joe, I am in an awkward fix. I have got myself
into a scrape, and I want you to help me out of it. You were good at
such things when we were at College, and I want you to try your hand
again."

"Well, what's the difficulty now?"

"Well, it is rather a serious one. I have got a child on my hands, and I
don't know what to do with it."

"Whose child is it?"

"Now, that's just where the difficulty lies. It is the child of one of
my girls, but it looks so much like me, that my wife don't want it on
the place. I am too hard up just now to take the child and her mother,
North, and take care of them there. And to tell you the truth I am too
humane to have the child sold here as a slave. Now in a word do you
think that among your Abolitionist friends in the North you could find
any one who would raise the child and bring it up like a white child."

"I don't know about that St. Pierre. There are a number of our people in
the North, who do two things. They hate slavery and hate negroes. They
feel like the woman who in writing to her husband said, they say (or
don't say) that absence conquers love; for the longer you stay away the
better I love you. But then I know some who, I believe, are really
sincere, and who would do anything to help the colored people. I think I
know two or three families who would be willing to take the child, and
do a good part by her. If you say so, I will write to a friend whom I
have now in mind, and if they will consent I will take the child with me
when I go North, provided I can do it without having it discovered that
she is colored, for it would put me in an awkward fix to have it known
that I took a colored child away with me."

"Oh, never fear," said St. Pierre, slapping his friend on the shoulder.
"The child is whiter than you are, and you know you can pass for white."

True to his promise, Josiah Collins wrote to a Quaker friend, whom he
knew in Pennsylvania, and told him the particulars of the child's
history, and the wishes of her father, and the compensation he would
give. In a few days he received a favorable response in which the friend
told him he was glad to have the privilege of rescuing one of that fated
race from a doom more cruel than the grave; that the compensation was no
object; that they had lost their only child, and hoped that she would in
a measure fill the void in their hearts.

Highly gratified with the kind letter of the friend, Le Grange gave the
child into the charge of Josiah Collins, and putting a check for five
hundred dollars in his hand, parted with them at the [station].

He went back into the country, and told his wife that he had found a
trader, who thought the child so beautiful, and that he had bought her
to raise as a fancy girl, and had given him five hundred dollars for
her. "And here," said he, handing her a set of beautiful pearls, "is my
peace offering."

Georgette's eyes glistened as she entertwined the pearls amid the wealth
of her raven hair, and clasped them upon her beautifully rounded arms.

What mattered it to her if every jewel cost a heart throb, and if the
whole set were bought with the price of blood? They suited her style of
beauty, and she cared not what they cost. Proud, imperious, and selfish,
she knew no law but her own will; no gratification but the enjoyment of
her own desires.

Passing from the boudoir of his wife, he sought the room where Ellen
sat, busily cutting and arranging the clothing for the field hands, and
gazing furtively around he said, "here is Minnie's likeness. I have
managed all right." "Thank Heaven!" said the sad hearted mother, as she
paused to dry her tears, and then resumed her needle. "Anything is
better--than Slavery."




Chapter V


Before I proceed any further with my story, let me tell the reader
something of the Le Granges, whom I have so unceremoniously introduced.

Le Grange, like Le Croix, was of French and Spanish descent, and his
father had also been a Haytian refugee. But there the similitude ends;
unlike Le Croix, he had grown up a gay and reckless young man, fond of
sports, and living an aimless life.

His father had on his plantation a beautiful quadroon girl, named Ellen,
whom he had bought in Richmond because she begged him to buy her when he
had bought her mother, who had been recommended to him as a first-rate
cook. They had been servants in what was called one of the first
families of Virginia, and had been treated by their mistress with more
kindness and consideration than generally fell to the lot of persons in
their condition. As long as she lived, they had been well fed and well
clothed, and except the deprivation of their freedom, had known but few
of the hardships so incident to slave life; but a reverse had fallen
upon them.

Their mistress had intended to set them free, but, dying suddenly, she
had failed to carry out her intention. Her property fell into the hands
of distant heirs, who sold it all, and divided it among themselves.
Ellen and her mother were put up at auction, when a kindly looking old
Frenchman bought the mother. Ellen stood trembling by; but, when she saw
her mother's new master, she started forth, and kneeling at his feet,
she begged him to buy her. The mother joined in and said, "Do, Massa,
and I'll serve you faithful day and night; there is a heap of work in
these old bones yet."

Mr. Le Grange told her to be quiet, and he would buy her. And, true to
his word, although the bidding ran high, and the competition was fierce,
he bought her; and the next day, he started with them for his plantation
on Red River.

His son, Louis, had just graduated, and was spending the winter at home,
in just that mood of which it is said that Satan finds some mischief for
idle hands to do. Milly, who knew the wiles of the world better than
Ellen, tried to keep her as much as possible out of his way; but her
caution was all in vain. She saw her child engulfed, as thousands of her
race had been.

Mrs. Le Grange, when she became apprised of the condition of things,
grew very angry; but, instead of venting her indignation upon the head
of her offending son, she poured out the vials of her wrath upon the
defenseless girl. She made up her mind to sell her off the place, and
picked the opportunity, while her son was absent, to send her to a
trader's pen in the city. When Louis came home, he found Milly looking
very sullen and distressed, and her eyes red with weeping.

"What is the matter?" said Louis.

"Matter enough," said Milly. "Missus done gone and sold Ellen."

"Sold Ellen! Why, how did that happen?"

"Why, she found out all about her, and said she should not stay on the
place another day, and so she sent her down to Orleans to the nigger
traders, and my heart's most broke," and Milly sat down, wiping her
tears with her apron.

"Never mind, Milly," said Louis, "I'll go down to New Orleans and bring
her back. Mother sha'n't do as she pleases with me, as if I were a boy,
and must always be tied to her apron string. I've got some money of my
own, and I mean to find Ellen if I have to look all over the country."

He entered the dining room, and saw his mother seated at the tea table,
looking as bland and pleasant as a Spring morning, and asked, "Where is
Ellen?"

The smile died from her lips, and she answered, curtly, "She is out of
_your_ reach [?]. I've sold her."

"But where have you sold her?"

"Out of your reach, and that is all I am going to tell you."

Louis, without saying another word went out to the coachman, and asked
what time the cars left the station.

"Ten minutes to nine."

"Can you take me there in time to reach the train? I want to go to the
city tonight."

"Dunno, massa; my best horse is lame, and what----"

"Never mind your excuse; here," said he, throwing him a dollar, "hitch
up as quick as possible, and take me there without any 'buts' or 'ifs.'"

"All right, massa," said Sam, grinning with delight. "I'll have you over
there in short order."

The carriage harnessed, Samuel found no difficulty with his horses, and
reached the depot almost a half hour before the time.

Louis arrived in the city after midnight, and the next day he devoted to
hunting for Ellen. He searched through different slave pens, inquired of
all the traders, until at last, ready to abandon his search in
hopelessness, he heard of a private jail in the suburbs of the city.
Nothing daunted by his failure, he found the place and Ellen also.

The trader eyed him keenly, and saw from his manner that he was in
earnest about having the girl.

"She is not for sale in this city. Whoever buys her must give me a
pledge to take her out of this city. That was the bargain I made with
her mistress. She made me promise her that I would sell her to no one in
the vicinity of the city. In fact, she wanted me to sell her out of the
way of her son. His mother said she had dedicated him to the Blessed
Virgin, and I reckon she wanted to keep him out of the way of
temptation. Now what will you give me for her?"

"Will you take a thousand for her?"

"Now you ain't saying nothing," said the trader, shutting one eye, and
spitting on the floor.

"How will twelve hundred do?"

"It won't do at all, not for such a fancy article as that. I'd rather
keep her for myself than sell her at such a low figure. Why, just look
at her! Why, she's pretty as a picture! Look at that neck, and her
shoulders. See how she carries her head! And look at that splendid head
of hair. Why some of our nabobs would give three thousand dollars; but
I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll let you have her for two thousand
dollars; fancy article is cheap at that."

Louis demurred, but the trader was inexorable, and rather than let the
opportunity to rescue Ellen from him escape he paid the exorbitant
price, and had her brought to his hotel. His next work was to get a
house for Ellen, and have her taken there, installed as his mistress. He
then went back to the plantation as if nothing had happened, and his
mother soon thought he was reconciled about the loss of Ellen. Only
Milly knew his secret, and she kept it as a secret thing.

"I've got some pleasant news for you, Louis," said Mrs. Le Grange, one
day to her son: "your uncle and cousin are coming down from Virginia,
and I want you to be all attention to your cousin, for she is very rich.
She has a fortune in her right, which was left her by her grandmother,
and besides she will have another one at her father's death, added, to
which they say, she is a very beautiful girl."

Great preparations were made for the expected guests. Georgiette was
Mrs. Le Grange's brother's child, and having been separated from him
for more than fifteen years she was full of joyful anticipations, when
he apprised her of his intention of visiting her in company with his
daughter. At length the welcome day arrived, and Mrs. Le Grange stood
arranging her jewels and ribbons to receive the guests.

"You are welcome to Louisiana," said she, removing Georgiette's shawl,
and tenderly kissing her, "and you too, brother," she said, as Mr.
Monteith followed his daughter. "How beautiful Georgiette has grown
since I saw her. Why darling you look charming! I'm afraid I shan't be
able to keep you long for some of the beaux will surely run away with
you." "My son," said Mrs. Le Grange, introducing Louis, who just then
entered the door.

Louis bowed very low, and expressed his pleasure in seeing them; and
hoped they would have a happy time, and that nothing should be wanting
on his part, to make it so. Very pleasantly passed the time away;
Georgiette was in high and charming spirits; and many a pleasant ride
and delightful saunter she took with her cousin through the woods, or in
visiting other plantations. She was very popular among the planters'
sons; admired by the young men, but feared and envied by the girls.

And thus the hours passed in a whirl of pleasurable excitement, until
Louis actually imagined himself in love with her, and found himself one
pleasant afternoon offering her his hand and heart.

She blushed and sighed, and referred him to her papa; and in a few weeks
they were engaged.

At length the time of their departure came; and Louis, after
accompanying them to New Orleans, returned to make ready for the
wedding. His father made him a present of a large plantation, which he
stocked from his own purse, with three hundred slaves; and installed
Ellen there as housekeeper till the arrival of the new mistress.




Chapter VI


"Thee is welcome to S.," said the cheerful voice of Thomas Carpenter, as
Josiah Collins alighted, bringing with him his charge; "and is this the
little child thee wrote me about? I am heartily glad thee has rescued
her from that dreadful system!"

"Anna," said he, turning to his wife, who had just entered the room,
"here is our friend, Josiah Collins, and the little girl I told thee
about."

"I am glad thee has come," said Anna, "sit down and make thyself at
home. And this is the little girl thee wrote Thomas about. She is a
beautiful child," continued Anna, gazing admiringly at the child. "I
hope she will be contented. Does she fret about her mother?"

"Not much; she would sometimes ask, 'where is mamma?' But the ladies in
the cars were very kind to her, and she was quite at home with them. I
told them I was taking her North; that I thought the North would better
agree with her; and that it was not convenient for her mother to come on
just now. I was really amused with the attention she received from the
Southern ladies; knowing how they would have shrunk from such offices if
they had known that one drop of the outcast blood ran in her veins."

"Why, Josiah," said Anna, "I have always heard that there was more
prejudice against the colored people in the North than in the South.
There is a difference in the manifestations of this feeling, but I do
not think there is as much prejudice here as there. [Here?] we have a
prejudice which is [formed from?] traditional ideas. We see in many
parts of the North a very few of the colored people, and our impressions
of them have received their coloring more or less from what the
slaveholders have said of them."

"We have been taught that they are idle, improvident, and unfitted for
freedom, and incapable of progression; and when we see them in the
cities we see them overshadowed by wealth, enterprise, and activity, so
that our unfavorable impressions are too often confirmed. Still if one
of that class rises above this low mental condition, we know that there
are many who are willing to give such a one a healthy recognition."

"I know that there are those that have great obstacles to overcome, but
I think that while Southerners may have more personal likings for
certain favorite servants, they have stronger prejudices than even we
have, or if they have no more than we have, they have more
self-restraint, and show it more virulently."

"But I [think?] they do not seem to have any horror of personal
contact."

"Of course not; constant familiarity with the race has worn away all
sense of physical repulsion but there is a prejudice which ought to be
an American feeling; it is a prejudice against their rising in the scale
of humanity. A prejudice which virtually says you are down, and I mean
to keep you down. As a servant I tolerate you; you are useful as you are
valuable, but rise one step in the scale of being, and I am ready to put
you down. I see this in the treatment that the free colored people
receive in parts of the South; they seem to me to be the outcasts of an
outcast race. They are denied the right to walk in certain public places
accessible to every class unless they go as nurses, and are forbidden to
assemble in evening meetings, and forced to be in the house unless they
have passes, by an early hour in the night, and in fact they are
hampered or hemmed in on every side; subject to insults from any rude,
coarse or brutal white, and in case of outrages, denied their testimony.
Prejudiced as we are in Pennsylvania, we do not go that far."

"But, Josiah, we have much to blush for in Pennsylvania; colored people
are denied the privilege of riding in our street cars. Only last week
when I was in Philadelphia I saw a very decent-looking colored woman
with a child, who looked too feeble to walk, and the child too heavy for
her to carry. She beckoned to a conductor, but he swept by and took no
more heed of her than if she had been a dog. There was a young lady
sitting in the car, who remarked to her mother, as a very filthy-looking
white man entered, 'See, they will let that filthy creature ride and
prohibit a decent respectable colored person!' The mother quietly
assented.

"From her dress I took her to be a Quakeress, for she had a lovely dress
of dove-colored silk. The young lady had scarcely uttered the words when
a young man who sat next the mother deliberately arose, and beckoned to
the man with the sooty clothes to take his seat; but fortunately for the
Quakeress, a lady who was sitting next her daughter arose just at that
moment, and left the seat, and the old man without noticing the
manoeuvre passed over to the other side, and thus avoided the contact. I
was amused, however, about one thing; for the young man who gave up his
seat was compelled to ride about a mile standing."

"Served him right," said Thomas Carpenter; "it was a very contemptible
action, to attempt to punish the hardihood of the young lady by
attempting to soil her mother's dress; and yet little souls who feel a
morbid satisfaction in trampling on the weak, always sink themselves in
the scale of manhood."

While this conversation was going on, the tea bell rang, and Josiah and
his little charge sat down to a well supplied table; for the Friends,
though plain and economical, are no enemies to good living.

Anna had brought the high-chair in which their own darling had sat a few
months before, when she had made gladness and sunshine around her
parent's path.

There was a tender light in the eye of the Quakeress as she dusted the
chair, and sat Minnie at the table.

"Do you think," said Thomas, addressing Josiah, "that we will ever
outgrow this wicked, miserable prejudice?"

"Oh, yes, but it must be the work of time. Both races have their work to
do. The colored man must outgrow his old condition of things, and thus
create around him a new class of associations. This generation has known
him as a being landless, poor, and ignorant. One of the most important
things for him to do is to acquire land. He will never gain his full
measure of strength until (like Anteus) he touches the earth. And I think
here is the great fault, or misfortune of the race; they seem to me to
readily accept their situation, and not to let their industrial aspirations
rise high enough. I wish they had more of the earth hunger that
characterizes the German, or the concentration of purpose which we see
in the Jews."

"I think," said Thomas, "that the Jews and Negroes have one thing in
common, and that is their power of endurance. They, like the negro, have
lived upon an idea, and that is the hope of a deliverer yet to come; but
I think this characteristic more strongly developed in the Jews than in
the Negroes."

"Doubtless it is, but their origin and history have been different. The
Jews have a common ancestry and grand traditions, that have left alive
their pride of race. 'We have Abraham to our father,' they said, when
their necks were bowed beneath the Roman yoke."

"But I do not think the negro can trace with certainty his origin back
to any of the older civilizations, and here for more than two hundred
years his history has been a record of blood and tears, of ignorance,
degradation, and slavery. And when nominally free, prejudice has
assigned him the lowest positions and the humblest situations. I have
not much hope of their progress while they are enslaved in the South."

"Well, Josiah, I have faith enough in the ultimate triumph of our
principles to believe that slavery will bite the dust before long."

"I don't know, friend Carpenter; for the system is very strongly rooted
and grounded in the institutions of the land, and has entrenched itself
in the strongholds of Church and State, fashion, custom, and social
life. And yet when I was in the South, I saw on every hand a growing
differentiation towards the Government."

"Do you know, Josiah, that I have more hope from the madness and folly
of the South than I have from the wisdom and virtue of the North? I have
read too 'whom the gods would destroy they first make mad.'"




Chapter VII


Ten years have elapsed since Minnie came to brighten the home of Thomas
Carpenter, and although within the heart of Anna there is a spot forever
green and sacred to the memory of her only child, yet Minnie holds an
undivided place in their affections.

There is only one subject which is to them a source of concern. It is
the connection of Minnie with the colored race. Not that they love her
less on account of the blood that is in her veins, but they dread the
effect its discovery would have upon the pleasant social circle with
which she is surrounded, and also the fear that the revelation would be
painful to her.

They know that she is Anti-Slavery in her principles. They have been
careful to instil into her young mind a reverence for humanity, and to
recognize beneath all externals, whether of condition or color, the
human soul all written over with the handmarks of divinity and the
common claims of humanity.

She has known for years that their home has been one of the stations of
the underground railroad. And the Anti-Slavery lecturer, whether white
or colored, has always been among the welcomed guests of her home. Still
they shrink from the effect the knowledge would have on her mind. They
know she is willing to work for the colored race; but they could not
divine what it cost her to work with them.

"It seems to me, Anna, that we ought to reveal to Minnie the fact of her
connection with the colored race. I am afraid that she will learn in
some way that will rudely shock her; whereas we might break it to her
in the tenderest manner. Every time a fugitive comes I dread that our
darling will be recognized."

"Nay, Thomas; thy fears have made thee over sensitive. Who would imagine
he saw in this bright and radiant girl of fifteen the little
five-year-old child we took to our hearts and home? I never feel any
difference between her and the whitest child in the village as far as
prejudice is concerned. And if every body in the village knew her origin
I would love her just as much as I ever did, for she is a dear good
child."

"Well, dear, if you think it is best to keep it a secret, I will not
interfere. But we must not forget that Minnie will soon be a young lady;
that she is very beautiful, and even now she begins to attract
admiration. I do not think it would be right for us to let her marry a
white man without letting her know the prejudices of society, and giving
her a chance to explain to him the conditions of things."

"Yes," said Anna, "that is true; I have heard that traces of that blood
will sometimes reappear even in grandchildren, when it has not been
detected in the first. And to guard against difficulty which might arise
from such a course, I think it is better to apprise her of the facts in
the case."

"It is time enough for that. I want her to finish her education before
she thinks of marrying, and I am getting her ready to go to
Philadelphia, where she will find an excellent school as I have heard it
very highly spoken of. She is young and happy, trouble will come time
enough, let me not hasten its advent."

But if time has only strewed the path of Minnie with flowers, and
ripened the promised beauty of her childhood, it has borne a heavy hand
upon the destiny of the La Croix family.

La Croix is dead; but before his death he took the precaution to have
Louis emancipated, and then made him a joint heir with his daughter. The
will he entrusted to the care of Camilla; but the deed of emancipation
he placed in the hands of Miriam, saying, "Here are your free papers,
and here are Louis'. There is nothing in this world sure but death; and
it is well to be on the safe side. Some one might be curious enough to
search out his history; and if there should be no legal claim to his
freedom, he might be robbed of both his liberty and his inheritance; so
keep these papers, and if ever the hour comes when you or he should need
them, you must show me."

Miriam did as she was bidden; but her heart was lighter when she knew
that freedom had come so near her and Louis.

Le Croix, before his death, had sold the greater part of his slaves, and
invested the money in Northern bonds and good Northern securities.
Camilla had married a gentleman from the North, and is living very
happily upon the old plantation. She does not keep an overseer, and
tries to do all in her power to ameliorate the condition of her slaves;
still she is not satisfied with the system, and is trying to prepare her
slaves for freedom, by inducing them to form, as much as possible,
habits of self-reliance, and self-restraint, which they will need in the
freedom which she has determined they shall enjoy as soon as she can
arrange her affairs to that effect. But she also has to proceed with a
great deal of caution.

The South is in a state of agitation and [foment?]. The air is laden
with rumors of a [rising?] conflict between the North and the South, and
any want of allegiance to Southern opinions is punished either as a
crime if the offender is a man, or with social ostracism and insult if a
woman.

The South in the palmy days of her pride and power would never tolerate
any heresy to her creed, whose formula of statement might have been
written we believe in the divine right of the Master, to take advantage
of the weakness, ignorance, and poverty of the slave; that might makes
right, and that success belongs to the strongest arm.[1]

Some of her former friends were beginning to eye her with coldness and
suspicion because she would not join in their fanatical hatred of the
North and because she would profess her devotion to the old flag, while
they were ready to spit upon and trample it under foot.

Her adopted brother was still in the North, and strange to say he did
not share her feelings; his sympathies were with the South, and although
he was too young to take any leading part in the events there about to
transpire, yet year after year when he spent his vacations at home, he
attended the hustings and political meetings, and there he learned to
consider the sentiment, "My country right or wrong," as a proper maxim
for political action.

This difference in their sentiments did not produce the least
estrangement between them; only Camilla regretted to see Louis ready to
raise his hand against the freedom of his mother's race, although he was
perfectly unconscious of his connection with it, for the conflict which
was then brewing between the North and the South was in fact a struggle
between despotism and idea; between freedom on one side and slavery on
the other.




Chapter VIII


"Commencement over, what are you going to do with yourself?"

"I don't know; loaf around, I suppose."

"Why don't you go to Newport?"

"Don't want to; got tired of it last year."

"Saratoga?"

"A perfect bore!"

"Niagara?"

"Been there twice."

"A pedestrian tour to the White Mountains?"

"Haven't got energy enough."

"What will you do?"

"Stay at home and fight mosquitoes."

"Very pleasant employment. I don't envy you, but I can tell you
something better than that."

"What is it?" said his companion, yawning.

"Come, go home with me."

"Go home with you! Where is that, and what is the attraction?"

"Well, let me see, it is situated in one of the most beautiful valleys
of Western Pennsylvania, our village is environed by the most lovely
hills, and nestling among the trees, with its simple churches and
unpretending homes of quiet beauty and good taste, it is one of the most
pleasant and picturesque places I ever saw. And, besides, as you love to
hunt and fish, we have one of the finest streams of trout, and some of
the most excellent game in the woods."

"Is that all?"

"Why, isn't that enough? You must be rather hard to please this
morning."

"Think so?"

"Yes, but I have not told you the crowning attraction."

"What is it?"

"Oh, one of the most beautiful girls I ever saw! We call her the lily of
the valley."

"Describe her."

"I can't. It would be like attempting to paint a sun beam or doing what
no painter has ever done, sketch a rainbow."

"You are very poetical this morning, but I want you to do as our
President sometimes tells us, proceed from the abstract to the
concrete."

"Well, let me begin: she has the most beautiful little feet. I never see
her stepping along without thinking of Cinderella and the glass slipper.
As to eyes, they are either dark brown or black, I don't know which; but
I do know they are beautiful; and her hair, well, she generally wears
that plain in deference to the wishes of her Quaker friends, but
sometimes in the most beautiful ripples of golden brown I ever saw."

"That will do, now tell me who she is? You spoke of her Quaker friends.
Is she not their daughter?"

"No, there seems to be some mystery about her history. About ten years
ago, my father brought her to Josiah Carpenter's but he's always been
reticent about her, in fact I never took the pains to inquire. She's a
great favorite in the village, and everybody says she is as beautiful as
she is good, and vice versa."

"Well, I'd like to see this paragon of yours. I believe I'll go."

"Well, let us get ready."

"When do you start?"

"To-morrow."

"All right. I'll be on hand." And with these words the two friends
parted to meet again the next day at the railroad station.

The first of the speakers is the son of Josiah Collins, and his friend
is Louis Le Croix, Camilla's adopted brother. He is somewhat changed
within the last ten years. Time has touched the golden wealth of his
curls with a beautiful deep auburn, and the rich full tones of his voice
tell that departed is written upon his childhood.

He is strongly Southern in his feelings, but having been educated in the
North, whilst he is an enthusiast in defense of his section, as he calls
the South, he is neither coarse and brutal in actions, nor fanatical in
his devotion to slavery. He thinks the Negroes are doing well enough in
slavery, if the Abolitionists would only let matters rest, and he feels
a sense of honor in defending the South. She is his mother, he says, and
that man is an ingrate who will not stand by his mother and defend her
when she is in peril.

He and Charles Collins are fast friends, but [on the subject of slavery
they are entirely opposed?]. And so on that point they have agreed to
disagree. They often have animated and exciting discussions, but they
[pass?] and Josiah and Louis are just as friendly as they were before.

There were two arrivals the next evening in the [quiet?] village of S.
One was Charles Collins, the other his Southern friend, who was received
with the warmest welcome, and soon found himself at home in the pleasant
society of his friend's family. The evening was enlivened with social
chat and music, until ten o'clock, when Josiah gathered his children and
having read the Bible in a deeply impressive manner, breathed one of the
most simple and fervent prayers he had ever heard.

While they were bending at prayer in this pleasant home, a shabby
looking man came walking slowly and wearily into the village. He gazed
cautiously around and looked anxiously in the street as though he were
looking for some one, but did not like to trust his business to every
one.

At length he saw an elderly man, dressed in plain clothes, and a broad
brim hat, and drawing near he spoke to him in a low and hesitating
voice, and asked if he knew a Mr. Thomas Carpenter.

"My name is Carpenter," said the friend, "come with me."

There was something in the voice, and manner of the friend that
_assured_ the stranger. His whole manner changed. A peaceful expression
stole over his dark, sad face, and the drooping limbs seemed to be
aroused by a new infusion of energy.

"Come in," said Thomas, as he reached his door, "come in, thee's welcome
to stop and rest with us."

"Anna," said Thomas,[2] his face beaming with kindness, "I've brought
thee a guest. Here is another passenger by the Underground Railroad."

"I'm sure thee's welcome," said Anna, handing him a chair, "sit down,
thee looks very tired. Where did thee come from?"

Moses, that was the fugitive's name, hesitated a moment.

"Oh, never fear, thee's among friends; thee need not be afraid to tell
all about thyself."

Moses then told them that he had come from Kentucky.

"And how did thee escape?"

He said, "I walked from Lexington to Covington."

"Why, that was almost one hundred miles, and did thee walk all that
way?"

"Yes, sir," said he, "I hid by day, and walked by night."

"Did no one interrupt?"

"Yes, one man said to me, 'Where's your pass?' I suppose I must have
grown desperate, for I raised my fists and said dem's my passes; and he
let me alone. I don't know whether he was friendly or scared, but he let
me alone."

"And how then?"

"When I come to Covington I found that I could not come across the river
without a pass, but I watched my chance, and hid myself on a boat, and I
got across. I'd heard of you down home."

"How did you?"

"Oh, we's got some few friends dere, but we allers promise not to tell."

Anna and Thomas[3] smiled at his reticence, which had grown into a
habit.

"Were you badly treated?"

"Not so bad as some, but I allers wanted my freedom, I did."

"Well, we will not talk about thee any more; if thee walked all that
distance thee must be very tired and we'll let thee rest. There's thy
bed. I hope thee'll have a good night's rest, and feel better in the
morning."

"Thankee marm," said Moses, "you's mighty good."

"Oh no, but I always like to do my duty by my fellow men! Now, be quiet,
and get a good night's sleep. Thee looks excited. Thee mustn't be
uneasy. Thee's among friends."

A flood of emotions crept over the bosom of Moses when his kind friends
left the room. Was this freedom, and was this the long wished for North?
and were these the Abolitionists of whom he had heard so much in the
South? They who would allure the colored people from their homes in the
South and then leave them to freeze and starve in the North? He had
heard all his life that the slaveholders were the friends of the South,
and the language of his soul had been, "If these are my friends, save me
from my foes." He had lived all his life among the white people of the
South, and had been owned by several masters, but he did not know that
there was so much kindness among the white race, till he had rested in a
Northern home, and among Northern people.

Here kindness encouraged his path, and in that peaceful home every voice
that fell upon his ear was full of tenderness and sympathy. True, there
were rough, coarse, brutal men even in that village, who for a few
dollars or to prove their devotion to the South, would have readily
remanded him to his master, but he was not aware of that. And so when he
sank to his rest a sense of peace and safety stole over him, and his
sleep was as calm and peaceful as the slumber of a child.

The next morning he looked refreshed, but still his strength was wasted
by his great physical exertion and mental excitement; and Thomas[4]
thought he had better rest a few days till he grew stronger and better
prepared to travel; for Thomas[5] noticed that he was nervous, starting
at the sound of every noise, and often turning his head to the door with
an anxious, frightened look.

Thomas would have gladly given him shelter and work, and given him just
wages, but he dared not do so. He was an American citizen it is true,
but at that time slavery reigned over the North and ruled over the
South, and he had not the power under the law of the land to give
domicile, and break his bread to that poor, hunted and flying man; for
even then they were hunting in the South and sending out their human
bloodhounds to search for him in the North.

Throughout the length and breadth of the land, from the summit of the
rainbow-crowned Niagara to the swollen waters of the Mexican Gulf; from
the golden gates of sunrise to the gorgeous portals of departing day,
there was not a hill so high, a forest so secluded, a glen so
sequestered, nor mountain so steep, that he knew he could not be tracked
and hailed in the name of the general government.

"What's the news, friend Carpenter? any new arrivals?" said Josiah
Collins in a low voice to Thomas.

"Yes, a very interesting case; can't you come over?"

"Yes, after breakfast. By the way, you must be a little more cautious
than usual. Charley came home last night, and brought a young friend
with him from college. I think from his conversation that he is either a
Southerner himself, or in deep sympathy with the South."

Both men spoke in low tones, for although they were Northerners, they
were talking about a subject on which they were compelled to speak with
bated breaths.

After breakfast Josiah came over, but Moses seemed so heavy and over
wearied that they did not care to disturb him. There was a look of
dejection and intense sadness on the thin worn face, and a hungry look
in the mournful eyes, as if his soul had been starving for kindness and
sympathy. Sometimes he would forget his situation, and speak hopefully
of the future, but still there was a weariness that he could not shake
off, a languor that seemed to pervade every nerve and muscle.

Thomas thought it was the natural reaction of the deep excitement,
through which he just passed, that the tension of his nerves had been
too great, but that a few days rest and quiet would restore him to his
normal condition; but that hope soon died away.

The tension, excitement, and consequent exhaustion had been too much.
Reason tottered on its throne, and he became a raving maniac; in his
moments of delirium he would imagine that he was escaping from slavery;
that the pursuers were upon his back; that they had caught him, and were
rebinding him about to take him back to slavery, and then it was
heartrending to hear him beg, and plead to be carried to Thomas
Carpenter's.

He would reach out his emaciated hands, and say "Carry me to Mr.
Carpenter's, that good man's house," for that name which had become more
precious to him than a household to his soul, still lingered amid
shattered cells. But the delirium spent its force, and through the
tempests of his bosom the light of reason came back.

One night he slept more soundly than usual; and on the next morning his
faithful friends saw from the expression of his countenance and the
light in his eyes that his reason had returned. They sent for their
family physician, a man in whose honor they could confide. All that
careful nursing and medical skill could do was done, but it was in vain;
his strength was wasted; the silver cord was loosed, and the golden bowl
was broken; his life was fast ebbing away. Like a tempest tossed mariner
dying in sight of land, so he passing away from earth, found the
precious, longed for, and dearly bought prize was just before, but his
hand was too feeble to grasp, his arms too powerless to hold it.

His friends saw from the expression of his face that he had something to
say; and they bent down to catch the last words of the departing spirit.

"I am dying," he said, "but I am thankful that I have come this near to
freedom."

He attempted to say no more, the death rattles sounded in his throat;
the shadows that never deceive flitted o'er his face, and he was dead.
His spirit gone back to God, another witness against the giant crime of
the land.

Josiah came again to see him, and entered the room just as the released
spirit winged its flight. Silently he uncovered him as if paying that
reverence to the broken casket which death exacts for his meanest
subjects. With tenderness and respect they prepared the body for the
grave, followed him to the silent tomb, and left him to his dreamless
sleep.


[Installment missing.]




Chapter IX


"Friend Carpenter, I have brought a friend to see you. He is a real
hot-headed Southerner, and I have been trying to convert him, but have
been almost ready to give it up as a hopeless task. I thought as you are
so much better posted than I am on the subject, _you_ might be able to
convert him from the error of his ways. He is a first-rate fellow, my
College chum. He has only one fault, he will defend Slavery. Cure him of
that, and I think he will be as near perfect as young men generally
are."

Friend Carpenter smiled at this good-natured rally, and said, "It takes
time for all things. Perhaps your friend is not so incorrigible as you
think he is."

"I don't know," said Charley, "but here he is; he can speak for
himself."

"Oh the system is well enough of itself, but like other things, it is
liable to abuse."

"I think, my young friend," said Thomas, "thee has never examined the
system by the rule of impartial justice, which tells us to do to all men
as we would have them do to us. If thee had, thee would not talk of the
abuses of Slavery, when the system is an abuse itself. I am afraid thee
has never gauged the depth of its wickedness. Thy face looks too honest
and frank to defend this system from conviction. Has thee ever examined
it?"

"Why, no, I have always been used to it."

Louis, who liked the honest bluntness of the Quaker, would have
willingly prolonged the conversation, simply for the sake of the
argument, but just then Minnie entered, holding in her hand a bunch of
flowers, and started to show them to her father, before she perceived
that any company was in the room.

"Oh father," said she, "see what I have brought you!" when her eye fell
upon the visitors, and a bright flush overspread her cheek, lending it
additional beauty.

Charles immediately arose, and giving her his hand, introduced her to
his friend.

"I am glad to see you, Minnie; you are looking so well this summer,"
said Charles, gazing on her with unfeigned admiration.

"I am glad you think so," said she, with charming frankness.

Some business having called friend Carpenter from the room, the young
people had a pleasant time to themselves, talking of books, poetry, and
the current literature of the day, although being students, their
acquaintance with these things was somewhat limited. By the time they
were ready to go, Thomas had re-entered the room and bidding them
good-bye, cordially invited them to return again.

"What do you think of her?" said Charles to his friend.

"Beautiful as a dream. The half had not been told. Her _acquaintance_
pays me for my trip; yes, I would like to become better acquainted with
her; there was such a charming simplicity about her, and such unaffected
grace that I am really delighted with her. How is it that you have never
fallen in love with her?"

"Oh, I have left that for you; but in fact we have almost grown
together, played with each other when we were children, until she
appears like one of our family, and to marry her would be like marrying
my own sister."

"How does thee like Charles' friend?" said Minnie, to her adopted
father.

Thomas spoke slowly and deliberately, and said, "He impresses me rather
favorably. I think there's the making of a man in him. But I hear that
he is pro-slavery."

"Yes, he is, but I think that is simply the result of former
associations and surroundings. I do not believe that he has looked
deeper than the surface of Slavery; he is quite young yet; his
reflective faculties are hardly fully awakened. I believe the time will
come, when he will see it in its true light, and if he joins our ranks
he will be an important accession to our cause. I have great hopes of
him. He seems to be generous, kind-hearted, and full of good impulses,
and I believe there are grand possibilities in his nature. How do you
like him?"

"Oh, I was much pleased with him. We had a very pleasant time together."

In a few days, Charles and Louis called again. Minnie was crocheting,
and her adopted mother was occupied with sewing; while Thomas engaged
them in conversation, the subject being the impending conflict; Louis,
taking a decided stand in favor of the South, and Thomas being equally
strong in his defense of the North.

The conversation was very animated, but temperate; and when they parted,
each felt confident of the rightfulness of his position.

"Come, again," said Thomas, as they were leaving; "we can't see eye to
eye, but I like to have thee come."

Louis was very much pleased with the invitation, for it gave him
opportunity to see Minnie, and sometimes she would smile, or say a word
or two when the discussion was beginning to verge on the borders of
excitement.

The time to return to College was drawing near, and Louis longed to tell
her how dear she was to him, but he never met her alone. She was so
young he did not like to ask the privilege of writing to her; and yet he
felt when he left the village, that it would afford him great
satisfaction to hear from her. He once hinted to Friend Carpenter that
he would like to hear from his family, and that if he was too busy
perhaps Miss Minnie might find time to drop a line, but Thomas did not
take the hint, so the matter ended; he hoping in the meantime to meet
her again, and renew their very pleasant acquaintance.




Chapter X


[Text missing.]




Chapter XI


"Is Minnie not well?" said Thomas Carpenter, entering one morning, the
pleasant room, where Anna was labelling some preserves. "She seems to be
so drooping, and scarcely eats anything."

"I don't know. I have not heard her complain; perhaps she is a little
tired and jaded from her journey; and then I think she studies too much.
She spends most of her time in her room, and since I think of it, she
does appear more quiet than usual; but I have been so busy about my
preserves that I have not noticed her particularly."

"Anna," said Thomas suddenly, after a moment's pause, "does thee think
that there is any attachment between Louis and Minnie? He was very
attentive to her when we were in Boston."

"Why, Thomas, I have never thought anything about it. Minnie always
seems so much like a child that I never get her associated in my mind
with courtship and marriage. I suppose I ought to though," said Anna,
with the faintest sigh.

"Anna, I think that something is preying on that child's mind, and
mother, thee knows that you women understand how to manage these things
better than we men do, and I wish thee would find out what is the matter
with the child. Try to find out if there is anything between her and
Louis, and if there is, by all means we must let her know about herself;
it is a duty we owe her and him."

"Well, Thomas, if we must we must; but I shrink from it. Here she comes.
Now I'll leave in a few minutes, and then thee can tell her; perhaps
thee can do it better than I can."

"What makes thee look so serious?" said Thomas, as Minnie entered the
room.

"Do I, father?"

"Yes, thee looks sober as a Judge. What has happened to disturb thee?"

"Nothing in particular; only I was down to Mr. Hickman's this morning,
and they have a colored woman stopping with them. She is a very
interesting and intelligent woman, and she was telling us part of her
history, and it was very interesting, but, mother, I do think it is a
dreadful thing to be a colored person in this country; how I should
suffer if I knew that I was hated and despised for what I couldn't help.
Oh, it must be dreadful to be colored."

"Oh, don't talk so, Minnie, God never makes any mistakes."

"I know that, mother; but, mother, it must be hard to be forced to ride
in smoking cars; to be insulted in the different thoroughfares of
travel; to be denied access to public resorts in some places,--such as
lectures, theatres, concerts, and even have a particular seat assigned
in the churches, and sometimes feel you were an object of pity even to
your best friends. I know that Mrs. Heston felt so when she was telling
her story, for when Mrs. Hickman said, 'Well, Sarah, I really pity you,'
I saw her dark eyes flash, and she has really beautiful eyes, as she
said, 'it is not pity we want, it is justice.'"

"In the first place, mother, she is a widow, with five children. She had
six. One died in the army,--and she had some business in Washington
connected with him. She says she was born in Virginia, and had one
little girl there, but as she could not bear the idea of her child
growing up in ignorance, she left the South and went to Albany. Her
husband was a barber, and was doing a good business there. She was
living in a very good neighborhood, and sent her child to the nearest
district school.

"After her little girl had been there awhile, her teacher told her she
must go home and not come there any more, and sent her mother a note;
the child did not know what she had done; she had been attentive to her
lessons, and had not behaved amiss, and she was puzzled to know why she
was turned out of school.

"'Oh! I hated to tell Mrs. Heston,' said the teacher; 'but the child
insisted, and I knew that it must come sooner or later. And so, said
she, I told her it was because she was colored.'

"'Is that all.' Poor child, she didn't know, that, in that fact lay
whole volumes of insult, outrage, and violence. I made up my mind, she
continued, that I would leave the place, and when my husband came home,
I said, 'Heston, let us leave this place; let us go farther west. I hear
that we can have our child educated there, just the same as any other
child.' At first my husband demurred, for we were doing a good business;
but I said, let us go, if we have to live on potatoes and salt.

"True, it was some pecuniary loss; but I never regretted it, although I
have been pretty near the potatoes and salt. My husband died, but I kept
my children together, and stood over the wash-tub day after day to keep
them at school. My oldest daughter graduated at the High School, and was
quite a favorite with the teachers. One term there was a vacancy in her
room, caused by the resignation of one of the assistant teachers, and
the first teacher had the privilege of selecting her assistants from the
graduates of the High School, their appointment, of course, being
subject to the decision of the Commissioner of Public Schools.

"'Her teacher having heard that she was connected by blood with one of
the first families of Virginia, told the Commissioner that she had
chosen an Assistant, a young lady of high qualifications, and as she
understood, a descendant of Patrick Henry.

"'Ah, indeed,' said the Commissioner, 'I didn't know that we had one of
that family among us. By all means employ her;' but as she was about to
leave, she said: 'I forgot to tell you one thing, she is colored.'

"A sudden change came over him, and he said: 'Do you think I would have
you walk down the street with a colored woman? Of course not. I'll never
give my consent to _that_.' And there the matter ended. And then she
made us feel so indignant when she told us that on her way to Washington
to get her son's pension, she stopped in Philadelphia, and the conductor
tried to make her leave the car, and because she would not, he ran the
car off the track."

"Oh, father," said she, turning to Thomas, "how wicked and cruel this
prejudice. Oh, how I should hate to be colored!"

Anna and Thomas exchanged mournful glances. Their hearts were too full;
and as Minnie left the room, Thomas said, "Not now, Anna. Not just yet."
And so Minnie[6] was permitted to return again to school with the secret
untold.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Minnie, darling, what are you doing? moping as usual over your books?
Come, it is Saturday morning, and you have worked hard enough for one
week; got all good marks; so now just put up that Virgil, and come go
out with me."

"Where do you wish to go?" said Minnie, to her light-hearted friend,
Carrie Wise.

"I want to go out shopping. Pa has just sent me twenty dollars, and you
know a girl and her money are soon parted."

"What do you wish to get?"

"Well, I want a pair of gloves, some worsted to match this fringe, and a
lot of things. Come, won't you go?"

"Oh, I don't know, I didn't intend going out this morning."

"Well, never mind if you didn't, just say you will go. Where's your hat
and mantle?" said Carrie, going to her wardrobe.

"Well, just wait till I fix my hair; it won't take long."

"Oh, Minnie, do let me fix it for you! If ever I have to work for my
living, I shall be a hair-dresser. I believe it is the only thing that I
have any talent for."

"What an idea! But do, Minnie, won't you, let me arrange your hair? You
always wear it so plain, and I do believe it would curl beautifully. May
I, Minnie?"

"Why yes."

So Carrie sat down, and in a short time, she had beautifully arranged
Minnie's hair with a profusion of curls.

"Do you know what I was thinking?" said Carrie, gazing admiringly upon
her friend. "You look so much like a picture I have seen of yours in
your father's album. He was showing me a number of pictures which
represent you at different ages, and the one I refer to, he said was our
Minnie when she was five years old. Now let me put on your hat. And let
me kiss you for you look so pretty?"

"Oh, Carrie, what an idea! You are so full of nonsense. Which way will
we go first?"

"First down to Carruther's. I saw a beautiful collar there I liked so
much; and then let us go down to Mrs. Barguay's. I want to show you a
love of a bonnet, one of the sweetest little things in ribbon, lace, and
flowers I ever saw."

Equipped for the journey the two friends sauntered down the street; as
they were coming out of a store, Carrie stopped for a moment to speak to
a very dear friend of her mother's, and Minnie passed on.

As she went slowly on, loitering for her friend, she saw a woman
approaching her from the opposite side of the street. There was
something in her look and manner which arrested the attention of Minnie.
She was a tall, slender woman about thirty five years old, with a pale,
care-worn face--a face which told that sorrow had pressed her more than
years. A few threads of silver mingled with the wealth of her raven
hair, and her face, though wearing a sad and weary expression, still
showed traces of great beauty.

As soon as her eyes fell on Minnie, she raised her hands in sudden
wonder, and clasping her in her arms, exclaimed: "Heaven is merciful! I
have found you, at last, my dear, darling, long-lost child. Minnie, is
this you, and have I found you at last?"

Minnie trembled from head to foot; a deadly pallor overspread her cheek,
and she stood still as if rooted to the ground in silent amazement,
while the woman stood anxiously watching her as if her future were
hanging on the decision of her lips.

"Who are you? and where did you come from?" said Minnie, as soon as she
gained her breath.

"I came from Louisiana. Oh, I can't be mistaken. I have longed for you,
and prayed for you, and now I have found you."

Just then, Carrie, who had finished speaking with her friend, seeing
Minnie and the strange woman talking together, exclaimed, "What is the
matter?"

Noticing the agitation of her friend, "Who is this woman, and what has
she said to you?"

"She says that she is my mother, my long-lost mother."

"Why, Minnie, what nonsense! She can't be your mother. Why don't you see
she is colored?"

"Where do you live?" said Minnie, without appearing to notice the words
of Carrie.

"I don't live anywhere. I just came here yesterday with some of the
Union soldiers."

"Come with me then, and I will show you a place to stop."

"Why, Minnie, you are not going to walk down the street with that
Nig--colored woman; if you are, please excuse me. My business calls me
another way."

And without any more ceremony Carrie and Minnie parted. Silently she
walked by the side of the stranger, a thousand thoughts revolving in her
mind. Was this the solution of the mystery which enshrouded her young
life? Did she indeed belong to that doomed and hated race, and must she
share the cruel treatment which bitter, relentless prejudice had
assigned them?

Thomas Carpenter and Anna were stopping in P., at the house of relatives
who knew Minnie's history, but who had never made any difference in
their treatment of her on that account.

"Is father and mother at home?" said Minnie to the servant, who opened
the door. She answered in the affirmative.

"Tell them to come into the parlor, they are wanted immediately."

"Sit down," said Minnie to the stranger, handing her a chair, "and wait
till father comes."

Anna and Thomas soon entered the room, and Minnie approaching them said,
"Father, this woman met me on the street to-day, and says she is my
mother. You know all about my history. Tell me if there is any truth in
this story."

"I don't know, Minnie, I never saw thy mother."

"But question her, father, and see if there is any truth in what she
says; but tell me first, father, am I white or colored?"

"Minnie, I believe there is a small portion of colored blood in thy
veins."

"It is enough," said Minnie, drawing closer to the strange woman. "What
makes you think that I am your child?"

"By this," said she, taking a miniature from her bosom. "By this, which
I carried next to my heart for more than twelve years, and never have
been without it a single day or night."

Thomas looked upon the miniature; it was an exact likeness of Minnie
when she first came to them, and although she had grown and changed
since the likeness was taken, there was too close a resemblance between
it and one which had been taken soon after she came, for him to doubt
that Minnie was the original of that likeness.

Thomas questioned the woman very closely, but her history and narrative
corresponded so well with what he had heard of Minnie's mother, that he
could not for a moment doubt that this was she, and as such he was
willing to give her the shelter of his home, till he could make other
arrangements.

"But why," said Anna, somewhat grieved at the shock, that Minnie had
received, "did thee startle her by so suddenly claiming her in the
street? Would it not have been better for thee to have waited and found
out where she lived, and then discovered thyself to her?"

"I'spect it would, 'Mam," said Ellen, very meekly and sorrowfully, "but
when I saw her and heard the young lady say, Minnie, wait a minute, I
forgot everything but that this was my long-lost child. I am sorry if I
did any harm, but I was so glad I could not help it. My heart was so
hungry for my child."

"Yes, yes," said Anna sadly, "I understand thee; it was the voice of
nature."

Minnie was too nervous and excited to return to her school that day; the
next morning she had a very high fever, and Thomas concluded it would be
better to take her home and have her mother accompany her.

And so on Monday morning Anna and Thomas left P., taking Minnie and her
mother along.

Once again in her pleasant home, surrounded by the tenderest care (for
her mother watched over her with the utmost solicitude) the violence of
her fever abated, but it was succeeded by a low nervous affection which
while it produced no pain yet it slowly unstrung her vitality.

Ellen hovered around her pillow as if she begrudged every moment that
called her from her daughter's side, and never seemed so well contented
as when she was performing for her some office of love and tenderness. A
skilful nurse, she knew how to prepare the most delicate viands to tempt
the failing appetite, and she had the exquisite pleasure of seeing her
care and attention rewarded by the returning health and strength of her
child.

One morning as she grew stronger, and was able to sit in her chair, she
turned her eyes tenderly towards Ellen and said, "Mother, come and sit
near me and let me hold your hand."

"Mother," Oh how welcome was that word. Ellen's eyes filled with sudden
tears.

"Mother," she said, "It comes back to me like a dream. I have a faint
recollection of having seen you before, but it is so long I can scarcely
remember it. Tell me all about myself and how I came to leave you. I
always thought that there was some mystery about me, but I never knew
what it was before, but now I understand it."

"Darling," said the mother, "you had better wait till you get a little
stronger, and then I will tell you all."

"Very well," said Minnie, "you have been so good to me and I am
beginning to love you so much."

It was touching to see the ripening love between those two
long-suffering ones. Ellen would comb Minnie's hair, and do for her
every office in her power. Still Minnie continued feeble. The suffering
occasioned by her refusal of Louis; the hard study and deep excitement
through which she had passed told sadly upon her constitution; but she
was young, and having a large share of recuperative power she slowly
came back to health and strength, and when the spring opened Thomas
decided that she should return again to her school in P.




Chapter XII


Let us now return to Carrie Wise, whom we left parting with Minnie.

"Where is Minnie?" said two of her schoolmates, who observed that
Carrie had come home alone.

"Oh," said she, "one of the strangest things I ever heard of happened!"

"Well, what was it?" said the girls; and by this time they had joined
another group of girls.

"Why this morning, Minnie and I walked out shopping, and just as I came
out of Carruthers' I met an old friend of mother's, and stopped to speak
with her, and I said 'Minnie, just wait a minute.'"

"She passed on, and left me talking with Mrs. Jackson. When I joined
her, I found a colored woman talking to her, and she was trembling from
head to foot, and just as pale as a ghost; and I said, 'Why, Minnie,
what is the matter?'"

"She gasped for breath, and I thought she was going to faint, and I got
real scared. And what do you think Minnie said?"

"Why," she said, "Carrie, this woman says she's my mother!"

"Her mother!" cried a half dozen voices. "Why you said she was colored!"

"Well, so she was. She was quite light, but I knew she was colored."

"How did you know? Maybe she was only a very dark-complexioned white
woman."

"Oh no, she wasn't, I know white people from colored, I've seen enough
of them."

"A colored woman! well that is very strange; but do tell us what Minnie
said."

"She asked her where she came from, and where she lived. She said she
came in yesterday with the Union soldiers, and that she had come from
Louisiana, and then Minnie told her to come with her, and she would find
a place for her to stop."

"And did she leave you in the street to walk with a Nigger?" said a
coarse, rough-looking girl.

"Yes, and so I left her. I wasn't going to walk down the street with
them!"

"Well, did I ever?" said a pale and interesting-looking girl.

"That is just as strange as a romance I have been reading!"

"Well, they say truth is stranger than fiction. A deceitful thing to try
to pass for white when she is colored! If she comes back to this school
I shan't stay!" said the coarse rough girl, twirling her gold pencil. "I
ain't a going to sit alongside of niggers."

"How you talk! I don't see that if the woman is Minnie's mother, and
_is_ colored, it makes any difference in her. I am sure it does not to
me," said one of Minnie's friends.

"Well, it does to me," said another; "you may put yourself on an
equality with niggers, but I won't." "And I neither," chimed in another
voice. "There are plenty of colored schools; let her go to them."

"Oh, girls, I think it real cruel the way you talk!"

"How would you like any one to treat you so?" "Can't help it, I ain't a
coming to school with a nigger." "She is just as good as you are, Mary
Patuck, and a great deal smarter." "I don't care, she's a nigger, and
that's enough for me."

And so the sentiment of the school was divided. Some were in favor of
treating her just as well as usual, and others felt like complaining to
their parents that a Negro was in school.

At last the news reached the teacher, and he, poor, weak, and
vacillating man, had not manhood enough to defend her, but acted
according to the prejudices of society, and wrote Thomas a note telling
him that circumstances made it desirable that she should not again come
to school.

In the meantime the news had reached their quiet little village, and of
course it offered food for gossip; it was discussed over tea-tables and
in the sewing circle. Some concluded that Thomas should have brought her
up among the colored people, and others that he did perfectly right.

Still there was a change in Minnie's social relations. Some were just
as kind as ever. Others grew distant, and some avoided having anything
to say to her, and stopped visiting the house. Anna and Thomas, although
superior people, were human, and could not help feeling the difference,
but some business of importance connected with the death of a relative
called Thomas abroad, and he made up his mind that he would take Anna
and Minnie with him, hoping that the voyage and change of scene would be
beneficial to his little girl, as he still called Minnie, and so on a
bright and beautiful morning in the spring of '62 he left the country
for a journey to England and the Continent.

Let us now return to Louis Le Croix, whom we left disappointed and
wounded by Minnie's refusal. After he left her he entered his room, and
sat for a long time in silent thought; at last he rose, and walked to
the window and stood with his hands clenched, and his finely chiseled
lips firmly set as if he had bound his whole soul to some great
resolve--a resolve which he would accomplish, let it cost what it might.

And so he had; for he had made up in his mind within the last two hours
that he would join the Confederacy. "That live or die, sink or swim,
survive or perish," he would unite his fortunes to her destiny.

His next step then was to plan how he could reach Louisiana; he felt
confident that if he could get as far as Louisville he could manage to
get into Tennessee, and from thence to Louisiana.

And so nothing daunted by difficulties and dangers, he set out on his
journey, and being aided by rebels on his way in a few weeks he reached
the old plantation on Red River; he found his sister and Miriam there
both glad to see him.

Camilla's husband was in Charleston, some of the slaves had deserted to
the Union ranks, but the greater portion she still retained with her.

Miriam was delighted to see Louis, and seemed never weary of admiring
his handsome face and manly form. And Louis, who had never known any
other mother seemed really gratified by her little kindnesses and
attention; but of course the pleasant and quiet monotony of home did not
suit the restless and disquieted spirit of Louis. All the young men
around here were in the army or deeply interested in its success.

There was a call for more volunteers, and a new company was to be raised
in that locality. Louis immediately joined, and turned his trained
intellect to the study of military tactics; day and night he was
absorbed in this occupation, and soon, although Minnie was not
forgotten, the enthusiasm of his young life gathered around the
Confederate cause.

He did not give himself much time to reflect. Thought was painful to
him, and he continued to live in a whirl of excitement.

News of battle, tidings of victory and defeats, the situation of the
armies, and the hopes and fears that clustered around those fearful days
of struggle made the staple of conversation.

Louis rapidly rose in favor with the young volunteers, and was chosen
captain of a company who were permitted to drill and stay from the front
as a reserve corps, ready to be summoned at any moment.




Chapter XIII


Miriam and Camilla watched with anguish Louis' devotion to the
Confederation, and many sorrowful conversations they had about it.

At last one day Miriam said, "Miss Camilla, I can stand it no
longer;--that boy is going to lift his hand agin his own people, and I
can't stand it no longer; I'se got to tell him all about it. I just
think I'd bust in two if I didn't tell him."

"Well, Mammy," said Camilla, "I'd rather he should know it than that he
should go against his country and raise his hand against the dear old
flag."

"It's not the flag nor the country I care for," said Miriam, "but it is
that one of my own flesh and blood should jine with these secesh agin
his own people."

"Well, Miriam, if you get a chance you can tell him."

"Get a chance, Miss Camilla, I'se bound to get that."

Louis was somewhat reticent about his plans; for he knew that Camilla
was a strong Union woman; that she not only loved the flag, but she had
taught her two boys to do the same; but he understood from headquarters
that his company was to march in a week, and although on that subject
there was no common sympathy between them, yet he felt that he must
acquaint her with his plans, and bid her and Miriam good-bye.

So one morning he came in looking somewhat flushed and excited, and
said: "Sister, we have got our marching orders; we leave on Thursday,
and I have only three days to be with you. I am sorry that I have seen
so little of you, but my country calls me, and when she is in danger it
is no time for me to seek for either ease or pleasure."

"Your country! Louis," said Miriam, her face paling and flushing by
turns. "Where is your country?"

"Here," said he, somewhat angrily, "in Louisiana."

"My country," said Camilla,[7] "is the whole Union. Yes, Louis," said
she, "your country is in danger, but not from the Abolitionists in the
North, but from the rebels and traitors in the South."

"Rebels and traitors!" said Louis, in a tone like one who felt the harsh
grating of the words.

"Whom do you mean?"

"I mean," said she, "the ambitious, reckless men who have brought about
this state of things. The men who are stabbing their country in their
madness and folly; who are crowding our graves and darkening our homes;
who are dragging our young men, men like you, who should be the pride
and hope of our country, into the jaws of ruin and death."

Louis looked surprised and angry; he had never seen Camilla under such
deep excitement. Her words had touched his pride and roused his anger;
but suppressing his feelings he answered her coolly, "Camilla, I am old
enough to do my own thinking. We had better drop this subject; it is not
pleasant to either of us."

"Louis," said she, her whole manner changing from deep excitement to
profound grief, "Oh, Louis, it will never do for you to go! Oh, no, you
must not!"

"And why not?"

"Because,"--and she hesitated. Just then Miriam took up the unfinished
sentence,"--because to join the secesh is to raise your hands agin your
own race."

"My own race?" and Louis laughed scornfully. "I think you are talking
more wildly than Camilla. What do you mean, Miriam?"

"I mean," said she, stung by his scornful words, "I mean that you, Louis
Le Croix, white as you look, are colored, and that you are my own
daughter's child, and if it had not been for Miss Camilla, who's been
such an angel to you, that you would have been a slave to-day, and then
you wouldn't have been a Confederate."

At these words a look of horror and anguish passed over the face of Le
Croix, and he turned to Camilla, but she was deadly pale, and trembling
like an aspen leaf; but her eyes were dry and tearless.

"Camilla," said he, turning fiercely to his adopted sister, "Tell me, is
there any truth in these words? You are as pale as death, and trembling
like a leaf,--tell me if there is any truth in these words," turning and
fixing his eyes on Miriam, who stood like some ancient prophetess, her
lips pronouncing some fearful doom, while she watched in breathless
anguish the effect upon the fated victim.

"Yes, Louis," said Camilla, in a voice almost choked by emotion. "Yes,
Louis, it is all true."

"But how is this that I never heard it before? Before I believe this
tale I must have some proof, clear as daylight. Bring me proofs."

"Here they are," said Miriam, drawing from her pocket the free papers
she had been carrying about her person for several days.

Louis grasped them nervously, hastily read them, and then more slowly,
like one who might read a sentence of death to see if there was one word
or sentence on which he might hang a hope of reprieve.

Camilla watched him anxiously, but silently, and when he had finished,
he covered his bowed face with his hands as he said with a deep groan,
"It is true, too true. I see it all. I can never raise my hand against
my mother's race."

He arose like one in a dream, walked slowly to the door and left the
room.

"It was a painful task," said Camilla, with a sigh of relief, as if a
burden had fallen from her soul.

"Yes," said Miriam, "but not so bad as to see him fighting agin his own
color. I'd rather follow him to his grave than see him join that
miserable secesh crew."

"Yes," said Camilla, "It was better than letting him go."

When Louis left the room a thousand conflicting thoughts passed through
his mind. He felt as a mariner at midnight on a moonless sea, who
suddenly, when the storm is brewing, finds that he has lost his compass
and his chart.




Chapter XIV


Where was he steering; and now, the course of his life was changed, what
kind of future must he make for himself?

Had it been in time of peace, he could have easily decided, as he had a
large amount of money in the North, which his father left him when he
came of age.

He would have no difficulty as to choosing the means of living; for he
was well supplied, as far as that was concerned; but here was a most
unpleasant dilemma in which he had placed himself.

Convinced that he was allied to the Negro race, his whole soul rose up
against the idea of laying one straw in its way; if he belonged to the
race he would not join its oppressors. And yet his whole sympathy had
been so completely with them, that he felt that he had no feeling in
common with the North.

And as to the colored people, of course it never entered his mind to
join their ranks, and ally himself to them; he had always regarded them
as inferior; and this sudden and unwelcome revelation had not changed
the whole tenor of his thoughts and opinions.

But what he had to do must be done quickly; for in less than three days
his company would start for the front. To desert was to face death; to
remain was to wed dishonor. He surveyed the situation calmly and
bravely, and then resolved that he would face the perils of re-capture
rather than the contempt of his own soul.

While he was deciding, he heard Camilla's step in the passage; he opened
the door, and beckoned her to a seat, and said, very calmly, "I have
been weighing the whole matter in my mind, and I have concluded to leave
the South."

"How can you do it?" said Camilla. "I tremble lest you should be
discovered. Oh slavery! what a curse. Our fathers sowed the wind, and we
are reaping the whirlwind! What," continued she, as if speaking to
herself, "What are your plans? Have you any?"

"None, except to disguise myself and escape."

"When?"

"As soon as possible."

"Suppose I call Miriam. She can help you. Shall I?"

"Yes."

Camilla called Miriam, and after a few moments consultation it was
decided that Louis should escape that night, and that Miriam should
prepare whatever was needed for his hasty flight.

"Don't trust your secret to any white person," said Miriam, "but if you
meet any of the colored people, just tell them that you is for the
Linkum soldiers, and it will be all right; we don't know all about this
war, but we feels somehow we's all mixed up in it."

And so with many prayers and blessings from Miriam, and sad farewells
from Camilla, he left his home to enter upon that perilous flight, the
whole current of his life changed.

It was in the early part of Winter; but the air was just as pleasant as
early Spring in that climate. Louis walked all that night, guiding
himself northward at night by the light of the stars and a little pocket
compass, Camilla had just given him before starting, and avoiding the
public roads during the day.

And thus he travelled for two days, when his lunch was exhausted, his
lips parched with thirst, and his strength began to fail.

Just in this hour of extremity he saw seated by the corner of a fence a
very black and homely-looking woman; there was something so gloomy and
sullen in her countenance that he felt repelled by its morose
expression. Still he needed food, and was very weary, and drawing near
he asked her if she would give him anything to eat.

"Ain't got nothing. De sojers done been here, and eat all up."

Louis drew near and whispered a few words in her ear, and immediately a
change passed over her whole countenance. The sullen expression turned
to a look of tenderness and concern. The harsh tones of her voice
actually grew mellow, and rising up in haste she almost sprang over the
fence, and said, "I'se been looking for you, if you's Northman you's
mighty welcome," and she set before him her humble store of provisions.

"Do you know," said Louis, "where I will find the Lincoln soldiers, or
where the secesh are encamped?"

"No," said she "but my old man's mighty smart, and he'll find out; you
come wid me."

Nothing doubting he went, and found the husband ready to do anything in
his power to help him.

"You's better not go any furder to-day. I'll get you a place to hide
where nobody can't find you, and then I'll pump Massa 'bout the sojers."

True to his word, he contrived to find out whether the soldiers were
near.

"Massa," said he, scratching his head, and looking quite sober, "Massa,
hadn't I better hide the mules? Oh I's 'fraid the Linkum sojers will
come take 'em, cause dey gobbles up ebery ting dey lays dere hans on,
jis like geese. I yerd dey was coming; mus' I hide de mules?"

"No, Sam, the scalawags are more than a hundred miles away; they are
near Natchez."

"Well, maybe, t'was our own Fedrate soldiers."

"No, Sam, our nearest soldiers are at Baton Rouge."

"All right Massa. I don't want to lose all dem fine mules."

As soon as it was convenient Sam gave Louis the desired information.
"Here," said Sam, when Louis was ready to start again, "is something to
break your fast, and if you goes dis way you musn't let de white folks
know what you's up to, but you trust dis," said he, laying his hand on
his own dark skin.

His new friend went with him several miles, and pointing him out the way
left him to pursue his journey onward. The next person he met with was a
colored man, who bowed and smiled, and took off his hat.

Louis returned the bow, and was passing on when he said, "Massa, 'scuse
me for speakin' to you, but dem secesh been hunting all day for a
'serter, him captin dey say."

Louis turned pale, but bracing his nerves he said, "Where are they?"

"Dey's in the house; is you he?"

"I am a Union man," Louis said, "and am trying to reach the Lincoln
soldiers."

"Den," said the man, "if dat am de fac I's got a place for you; come
with me," and Louis having learned to trust the colored people followed
him to a place of safety.

Soon it was noised abroad that another deserter had been seen in that
neighborhood, but the colored man would not reveal the whereabouts of
Louis. His master beat him severely, but he would let neither threats
nor torture wring the secret from his lips.

Louis saw the faithfulness of that man, and he thought with shame of his
former position to the race from whom such unswerving devotion could
spring. The hunt proving ineffectual, Louis after the search and
excitement had subsided resumed his journey Northward, meeting with
first one act of kindness and then another.

One day he had a narrow escape from the bloodhounds. He had trusted his
secret to a colored man who, faithful like the rest, was directing him
on his way when deep ominous sounds fell on their ears. The colored man
knew that sound too well; he knew something of the nature of
bloodhounds, and how to throw them off the track.

So hastily opening his pen-knife he cut his own feet so that the blood
from them might deepen the scent on one track, and throw them off from
Louis's path.

It was a brave deed, and nobly done, and Louis began to feel that he had
never known them, and then how vividly came into his mind the words of
Dr. Charming: "After all we may be trampling on one of the best branches
of the human race." Here were men and women too who had been trampled on
for ages ready to break to him their bread, aye share with him their
scanty store.

One had taken the shoes from his feet and almost forced him to take
them. What was it impelled these people? What was the Union to them,
and who were Lincoln's soldiers that they should be so ready to
gravitate to the Union army and bring the most reliable information to
the American General?

Was it not the hope of freedom which they were binding as amulets around
their hearts? They as a race had lived in a measure upon an idea; it was
the hope of a deliverance yet to come. Faith in God had underlain the
life of the race, and was it strange if when even some of our
politicians did not or could not read the signs of the times aright
these people with deeper intuitions understood the war better than they
did.

But at last Louis got beyond the borders of the confederacy, and stood
once more on free soil, appreciating that section as he had never done
before.




Chapter XV


[Text missing.]




Chapter XVI


"And I," said Minnie, "will help you pay it."

And so their young hearts had met at last, and with the approval and
hearty consent of Anna, Minnie and Louis were married.

It was decided that Minnie should spend the winter in Southern France,
and then in the spring they returned to America. On their arrival they
found the war still raging, and Louis was ready and anxious to benefit
that race to whom he felt he owed his life, and with whom he was
connected by lineage.

He had plenty of money, a liberal education, and could have chosen a
life of ease, but he was too ardent in his temperament, too decided in
his character, not to feel an interest in the great events which were
then transpiring in the country.

He made the acquaintance of some Anti-Slavery friends, and listened with
avidity to their doctrines; he attended a number of war meetings, and
caught the enthusiasm which inspired the young men who were coming from
valley, hill, and plain to fill up the broken ranks of the Union army.

Minnie, educated in peace principles, could not conscientiously
encourage him, and yet when she saw how the liberty of a whole race was
trembling in the balance she could not help wishing [success?] to the
army, nor find it in her heart to dissuade him from going.

Others had given their loved and cherished ones to camp and field. The
son of a dear friend had said to his mother, "I know I shall be killed,
but I go to free the slave." His presentiment had been met, for he had
been brought home in his shroud.

Another dear friend had said, "I have drawn my sword, and it shall never
sleep in its scabbard till the nation is free!" And she had heard that
summer of '64 how bravely the colored soldiers had stood at Fort Wagner,
when the storms of death were sweeping through the darkened sky. How
they summoned the world to see the grandeur of their courage and the
daring of their prowess.

How Corny had held with unyielding hand the nation's flag, and even when
he was wounded still held it in his grasp, and crawling from the scene
of action exclaimed, "I only did my duty, the old flag, I didn't let it
trail on the ground."

And she felt on reading it with tearful eyes, that if she belonged to
that race they had not shamed her by their want of courage; and so when
Louis came to her and told her his intention, she would not attempt to
oppose him, and when he was ready to depart, with many prayers, and sad
farewells, she gave him up to fight the battles of freedom, for such it
was to him, who went with every nerve in his right arm tingling to
strike a blow for liberty.

Hitherto Louis had known the race by their tenderness and compassion,
but the war gave him an opportunity to become acquainted with men brave
to do, brave to dare, and brave to die.

A colored man was the hero of one of the most tender, touching, and
tragic incidents of the war. A number of soldiers were in a boat exposed
to the fire of the rebels; on board was a colored man who had not
enrolled as a soldier, though his soul was full of sublime valor. The
bullets hissed and split the water, and the rowers tried to get out of
their reach, but all their efforts were in vain; the treacherous mud had
caught the boat, and some one must peril life and limb to shove that
boat into the water. And this man, the member of a doomed, a fated race,
who had been trodden down for ages, comprehending the danger, said,
"Some one must die to get us out of this, and it mout's well be me as
anybody; you are soldiers, and you can fight. If they kill me it is
nothing."

And with these words he arose, gave the boat a push, received a number
of bullets, and died within two days after.

Louis acquitted himself bravely, and rapidly rose in favor with his
superior officers. To him the place of danger was the post of duty. He
often received letters from Minnie, but they were always hopeful; for
she had learned to look on the bright side of everything.

She tried to beguile him with the news of the neighborhood, and to
inspire him with bright hopes for the future; that future in which they
should clasp hands again and find their duty and their pleasure in
living for the welfare and happiness of _our_ race, as Minnie would
often say.

A race upon whose brows God had poured the chrism of a new era--a race
newly anointed with freedom.

Oh, how the enthusiasm of her young soul gathered around that work! She
felt it was no mean nor common privilege to be the pioneer of a new
civilization. If he who makes two blades of grass grow where only one
flourished before is a benefactor of the human race, how much higher
and holier must his or her work be who dispenses light, instead of
darkness, knowledge, instead of ignorance, and over the ruins of the
slave-pen and auction-block erects institutions of learning.

She would say in her letters to Louis that the South will never be
rightly conquered until another army should take the field, and that
must be an army of civilizers; the army of the pen, and not the sword.
Not the destroyers of towns and cities, but the builders of machines and
factories; the organizers of peaceful industry and honorable labor; and
as soon as she possibly could she intended to join that great army.

Sometimes Louis would shake his head doubtfully, and tell her that the
South was a very sad place to live in, and would be for years, and,
while he was willing to bear toil and privation in the cause he had
learned to love, yet he shrank from exposing her to the social ostracism
which she must bear whether she identified herself with the colored race
or not.

However, her brave young heart never failed her, but kept true to its
purpose to join that noble band who left the sunshine of their homes to
help build up a new South on the basis of a higher and better
civilization.

Louis remained with the army till Lee had surrendered. The storm-cloud
of battle had passed away, and the thunders of contending batteries no
longer crashed and vibrated on the air.

And then he returned to Minnie, who still lived with Thomas Carpenter.
Very tender and joyous was their greeting. Louis thought he would rest
awhile and then arrange his affairs to return to the South. In this plan
he was heartily seconded by Minnie.

Thomas and Anna were sorry to part with her, but they knew that life was
not made for a holiday of ease and luxury, and so they had no words of
discouragement for them. If duty called them to the South it was right
that they should go; and so they would not throw themselves across the
purpose of their souls.




Chapter XVII


Before he located, Louis concluded to visit the old homestead, and to
present his beautiful young bride to his grandmother and Camilla.

He knew his adopted sister too well to fear that Minnie would fail to
receive from her the warmest welcome, and so with eager heart he took
passage on one of the Mississippi boats to New Orleans, intending to
stop in the city a few days, and send word to Camilla; but just as he
was passing from the levee to the hotel, he caught a glimpse of Camilla
walking down the street, and stopping the carriage, he alighted, and
spoke to her. She immediately recognized him, although his handsome face
had become somewhat bronzed by exposure in camp and field.

"Do not go to the hotel," she said, "you are heartily welcome, come home
with me."

"But my wife is along."

"Never mind, she's just as welcome as you are."

"But, like myself, she is colored."

"It does not matter. I should not think of your going to a hotel, while
I have a home in the city."

Camilla following, wondering how she would like the young wife. She had
great kindness and compassion for the race, but as far as social
equality was concerned, though she had her strong personal likings, yet,
except with Louis, neither custom nor education had reconciled her to
the maintenance of any equal, social relations with them.

"My wife," said Louis, introducing Camilla to Minnie. Camilla
immediately reached out her hand to the young wife, and gave her a
cordial greeting, and they soon fell into a pleasant and animated
conversation. Mutually they were attracted to each other, and when they
reached their destination, Minnie had begun to feel quite at home with
Camilla.

"How is Aunt Miriam, or rather, my grandmother?" said Louis.

"She is well, and often wonders what has become of her poor boy; but she
always has persisted in believing that she would see you again, and I
know her dear old eyes will run over with gladness. But things have
changed very much since we parted. We have passed through the fire since
I saw you, and our troubles are not over yet; but we are hoping for
better days. But we are at home. Let us alight."

And Louis and Minnie were ushered into a home whose quiet and refined
beauty were very pleasant to the eye, for Camilla had inherited from her
father his aesthetic tastes; had made her home and its surroundings
models of loveliness. Half a dozen varieties of the sweetest and
brightest roses clambered up the walls and arrayed them with a garb of
rare beauty. Jessamines breathed their fragrance on the air; magnolias
reared their stately heads and gladdened the eye with the exquisite
beauty of their flowers.

"This is an unexpected pleasure," said Camilla, removing Minnie's
bonnet, and gazing with unfeigned admiration upon her girlish face, "but
really some one must enjoy this pleasure besides myself."

Camilla rang the bell; a bright, smiling girl of about ten years
appeared. "Tell Miriam," she said, "to come; that her boy Louis is
here."

Miriam appeared immediately, and throwing her arms around his neck, gave
vent to her feelings in a burst of joy. "I always said you'd come back.
I's prayed for you night and day, and I always believed I'd see you
afore I died, and now my word's come true. There's nothing like having
faith."

"Here's my wife," said Louis, turning to Minnie.

"Your wife; is you married, honey? Well I hopes you'll have a good
time."

Minnie came forward and gave her hand to Miriam, as Louis said, "This is
my grandmother."

A look of proud satisfaction passed over the old woman's face, and a
sudden joy lit up her eyes at these words of pleasant recognition.

"Ah, my child," said Miriam, "We's had a mighty heap of trouble since
you left. Them miserable secesh searched the house all over for you,
when you was gone, and they was mighty sassy; but we didn't mind that,
so they didn't ketch you. How did you get along? We was dreadfully
uneasy about you?"

Louis then told them of the kindness of the colored people, his
thrilling adventures, and hair-breadth escapes, and unfolded to them his
plans for the future.

Camilla listened with deep interest, and turning to Minnie, who had left
the peaceful sunshine of her mother's home to dwell in the midst of that
rough and rude state of society, she said, "I cannot help feeling sad to
see you exposing yourself to the dangers that lay around your path. The
few Southern women who have been faithful to the flag have had a sad
experience since the war. We have been ostracized and abused, and often
our husbands have been brutally murdered, in a number of instances when
they were faithful to the dear old flag. A friend of mine, who was an
angel of mercy to the Union prisoners, dressing their wounds and
carrying them relief, had a dear son, who always kept a Union flag at
home, which he regarded with almost religious devotion. This made him a
marked boy in the community, and during the war he was so cruelly
beaten, by some young rebels, that he never recovered, and colored women
who would wend their way under the darkness and cover of night to aid
our suffering soldiers, were in danger of being flogged, if detected,
and I understand that one did receive 75 lashes for such an offence, and
I heard of another who was shot down like a dog, for giving bread to a
prisoner, who said, 'Mammy, I am starving.' I think, (but I have no
right to dictate to you) had I been you, and my home in the North, that
I would have preferred staying there, where, to say the least, you could
have had pleasanter social relations. You and Louis are nearer the
white race than the colored. Why should you prefer the one to the
other?"

"Because," said Minnie, "the prejudices of society are so strong against
the people with whom I am connected on my mother's side, that I could
not associate with white people on equal terms, without concealing my
origin, and that I scorned to do. The first years of my life passed
without my knowing that I was connected with the colored race; but when
it was revealed to me by mother, who suddenly claimed me, at first I
shrank from the social ostracism to which that knowledge doomed me, and
it was some time before I was reconciled to the change. Oh, there are
lessons of life that we never learn in the bowers of ease. They must be
learned in the fire. For months life seemed to me a dull, sad thing, and
for a while I did not care whether I lived or died, the sunshine had
suddenly faded from my path, and the future looked so dark and
cheerless. But now, when I look back upon those days of gloom and
suffering, I think they were among the most fruitful of my life, for in
those days of pain and sorrow my resolution was formed to join the
fortunes of my mother's race, and I resolved to brighten her old age
with a joy, with a gladness she had never known in her youth. And how
could I have done that had I left her unrecognized and palmed myself
upon society as a white woman? And to tell you the truth, having passed
most of my life in white society, I did not feel that the advantages of
that society would have ever paid me for the loss of my self-respect, by
passing as white, when I knew that I was colored; when I knew that any
society, however cultivated, wealthy or refined, would not be a social
gain to me, if my color and not my character must be my passport of
admission. So, when I found out that I was colored, I made up my mind
that I would neither be pitied nor patronized by my former friends; but
that I would live out my own individuality and do for my race, as a
colored woman, what I never could accomplish as a white woman."

"I think I understand you," said Camilla; "and although I tremble for
you in the present state, yet you cannot do better than live out the
earnest purpose of your life. I feel that we owe a great debt to the
colored race, and I would aid and not hinder any hand that is ready to
help do the needed work. I have felt for many years that slavery was
wrong, and I am glad, from the bottom of my heart, that it has at last
been destroyed. And what are your plans, Louis?"

"We are going to open a school, and devote our lives to the upbuilding
of the future race. I intend entering into some plan to facilitate the
freedmen in obtaining homes of their own. I want to see this newly
enfranchised race adding its quota to the civilization of the land. I
believe there is power and capacity, only let it have room for exercise
and development. We demand no social equality, no supremacy of power.
All we ask is that the American people will take their Christless,
Godless prejudices out of the way, and give us a chance to grow, an
opportunity to accept life, not merely as a matter of ease and
indulgence, but of struggle, conquest, and achievement."

"Yes," said Camilla, "what you want and what the nation should be just
enough to grant you is fair play."

"Yes, that is what we want; to be known by our character, and not by our
color; to be permitted to take whatever position in society we are
fitted to fill. We do not want to be bolstered and propped up on the one
hand, nor to be crushed and trampled down on the other."

"Well, Louis, I think that we are coming to that. No, I cannot feel that
all this baptism of fire and blood through which we have passed has been
in vain. Slavery, as an institution, has been destroyed. Slavery, as an
idea, still lives, but I believe that we shall outgrow this spirit of
caste and proscription which still tarnishes our civilization, both
North and South."




Chapter XVIII


After spending a few weeks with Camilla, Louis resolved to settle in the
town of L----n, and as soon as he had chosen his home and made
arrangements for the future, he sent for Ellen, and in a few days she
joined her dear children, as she called Louis and Minnie. Very pleasant
were the relations between Minnie and the newly freed people.

She had found her work, and they had found their friend. She did not
content herself with teaching them mere knowledge of books. She felt
that if the race would grow in the right direction, it must plant the
roots of progress under the hearthstone. She had learned from Anna those
womanly arts that give beauty, strength and grace to the fireside, and
it was her earnest desire to teach them how to make their homes bright
and happy.

Louis, too, with his practical turn of mind, used his influence in
teaching them to be saving and industrious, and to turn their attention
towards becoming land owners. He attended their political meetings, not
to array class against class, nor to inflame the passions of either
side. He wanted the vote of the colored people not to express the old
hates and animosities of the plantation, but the new community of
interests arising from freedom.

For awhile the aspect of things looked hopeful. The Reconstruction Act,
by placing the vote in the hands of the colored man, had given him a new
position. There was a lull in Southern violence. It was a great change
from the fetters on his wrist to the ballot in his right hand, and the
uniform testimony of the colored people was, "We are treated better than
we were before."

Some of the rebels indulged in the hope that their former slaves would
vote for them, but they were learning the power of combination, and
having no political past, they were radical by position, and when
Southern State after State rolled up its majorities on the radical side,
then the vials of wrath were poured upon the heads of the colored
people, and the courage and heroism which might have gained them
recognition, perhaps, among heathens, made them more obnoxious here.

Still Louis and Minnie kept on their labors of love; their inner lives
daily growing stronger and broader, for they learned to lean upon a
strength greater than their own; and some of the most beautiful lessons
of faith and trust they had ever learned, they were taught in the lowly
cabins of these newly freed people.

Often would Minnie enter these humble homes and listen patiently to the
old story of wrong and suffering. Sympathizing with their lot, she would
give them counsel and help when needed. When she was leaving they would
look after her wistfully, and say,

"She mighty good; we's low down, but she feels for we."

And thus day after day of that earnest life was spent in deeds and words
of love and kindness.

But let us enter their pleasant home. Louis has just returned from a
journey to the city, and has brought with him the latest Northern
papers. He is looking rather sober, and Minnie, ready to detect the
least change of his countenance, is at his side.

"What is the matter?" Minnie asked, in a tone of deep concern.

"I am really discouraged."

"What about?"

"Look here," said he, handing her the _New York Tribune_. "State after
State has rolled up a majority against negro suffrage. I have been
trying to persuade our people to vote the Republican ticket, but to-day,
I feel like blushing for the party. They are weakening our hands and
strengthening those of the rebels."

"But, Louis, they were not Republicans who gave these majorities against
us."

"But, darling, if large numbers of these Republicans stayed at home, and
let the election go by default, the result was just the same. Now every
rebel can throw it in our teeth and say, 'See your great Republican
party; they refuse to let the negro vote with them, but they force him
upon us. They don't do it out of regard to the negro, but only to spite
us.' I don't think, Minnie, that I am much given to gloomy forebodings,
but I see from the temper and actions of these rebels, that they are
encouraged and emboldened by these tidings from the North, and to-day
they are turning people out of work for voting the radical ticket. A
while ago they tried flattery and cajolery. You could hear it on almost
every side--'We are the best friends of the colored people.' Appeals
were made to the memories of the past; how they hunted and played
together, and searched for birds' nests in the rotten peach trees, and
when the colored people were not to be caught by such chaff, some were
trying to force them into submission by intimidation and starvation."

Just then a knock was heard at the door, and a dark man entered. There
was nothing in his appearance that showed any connection with the white
race. There was a tone of hopefulness in his speech, though his face
wore a somewhat anxious expression.

"Good morning, Mr. Jackson," said Louis, for, in deference to their
feelings he had dropped the "aunt" and "uncle" of bygone days.

"Good morning," replied the man, while a pleasant smile flitted over his
countenance.

"How does the world use you?" said Louis.

"Well, times are rather bilious with me, but I am beginning to pick up a
little. I get a few boots and shoes to mend. I always used to go to the
mountains, and get plenty of work to do; but this year they wouldn't
give me the situation because I had joined the radicals."

"What a shame," said Louis; "these men who have always had their rights
of citizenship, seem to know so little of the claims of justice and
humanity, that they are ready to brow-beat and intimidate these people
for voting according to their best interests. And what saddens me most
is to see so many people of the North clasping hands with these rebels
and traitors, and to hear it repeated that these people are too ignorant
to vote."

"Ignorant as they are," said Minnie, "during the war they knew more than
their masters; for they knew how to be true to their country, when their
masters were false to it, and rallied around the flag, when they were
trampling it under foot, and riddling it with bullets."

"Ah!" said uncle Richard, "I knows them of old. Last week some of them
offered me $500 if I would desert my party; but I wasn't going to
forsake my people. I have been in purty tight places this year. One
night when I come home my little girl said to me, 'Daddy, dere ain't no
bread in de house.' Now, that jist got me, but I begun to pray, and the
next day I found a quarter of a dollar, and then some of my colored
friends said it wouldn't do to let uncle Jack starve, and they made me
up seventy-five cents. My wife sometimes gets out of heart, but she
don't see very far off."

"I wish," said Louis, after Mr. Jackson had left, "that some of our
Northern men would only see the heroism of that simple-minded man. Here
he stands facing an uncertain future, no longer young in years, stripped
by slavery, his wife not in full sympathy with him, and yet with what
courage he refused the bribe."

"Yes," said Minnie, "$500 means a great deal for a man landless and
poor, with no assured support for the future. It means a comfortable
fire when the blasts of winter are roving around your home; it means
bread for the little ones, and medicine for the sick child, and little
start in life."

"But on the other hand," said Louis, "it meant betrayal of the interests
of his race, and I honor the faithfulness which shook his hands from
receiving the bribe and clasping hands politically with his life-long
oppressors. And I asked myself the question while he was telling his
story, which hand was the better custodian of the ballot, the white
hand that offered the bribe or the black one that refused it. I think
the time will come when some of the Anglo Saxon race will blush to
remember that when they were trailing the banner of freedom in the dust
black men were grasping it with earnest hands, bearing it aloft amid
persecution, pain, and death."

"Louis" said Minnie very seriously, "I think the nation makes one great
mistake in settling this question of suffrage. It seems to me that
everything gets settled on a partial basis. When they are reconstructing
the government why not lay the whole foundation anew, and base the right
of suffrage not on the claims of service or sex, but on the broader
basis of our common humanity."

"Because, Minnie, we are not prepared for it. This hour belongs to the
negro."

"But, Louis, is it not the negro woman's hour also? Has she not as many
rights and claims as the negro man?"

"Well, perhaps she has, but, darling, you cannot better the condition of
the colored men without helping the colored women. What elevates him
helps her."

"All that may be true, but I cannot recognize that the negro man is the
only one who has pressing claims at this hour. To-day our government
needs woman's conscience as well as man's judgment. And while I would
not throw a straw in the way of the colored man, even though I know that
he would vote against me as soon as he gets his vote, yet I do think
that woman should have some power to defend herself from oppression, and
equal laws as if she were a man."

"But, really, I should not like to see you wending your way through
rough and brawling mobs to the polls."

"Because these mobs are rough and coarse I would have women vote. I
would soften the asperity of the mobs, and bring into our politics a
deeper and broader humanity. When I see intemperance send its floods of
ruin and shame to the homes of men, and pass by the grog-shops that are
constantly grinding out their fearful grist of poverty, ruin and death,
I long for the hour when woman's vote will be levelled against these
charnel houses; and have, I hope, the power to close them throughout the
length and breadth of the land."

"Why darling," said Louis, gazing admiringly upon the earnest enthusiasm
lighting up her face, "I shall begin to believe that you are a
strong-minded woman."

"Surely, you would not have me a weak-minded woman in these hours of
trial."

"But, darling, I did not think that you were such an advocate for
women's voting."

"I think, Louis, that basing our rights on the ground of our common
humanity is the only true foundation for national peace and durability.
If you would have the government strong and enduring you should entrench
it in the hearts of both the men and women of the land."

"I think you are right in that remark," said Louis. And thus their
evenings were enlivened by pleasant and interesting conversations upon
the topics of the day.

Once when a union friend was spending an evening at their home Louis
entered, looking somewhat animated, and Minnie ever ready to detect his
moods and feelings, wanted to know what had happened.

"Oh, I have been to a wedding since I left home."

"And pray who was married?"

"Guess."

"I don't know whom to guess. One of our friends?"

"Yes."

"Was it Mr. Welland?"

"Yes."

"And who did he marry? Is she a Northern woman, and a staunch unionist?"

"Well, I can't imagine who she can be."

"Why he married Miss Henson, who sent you those beautiful flowers."

"Why, Louis, is it possible? Why she is a colored woman."

"I know."

"But how came he to marry her?"

"For the same reason I married you, because he loved her?"

"Well," said the union man, who sat quietly listening, "I am willing to
give to the colored people every right that I possess myself, but as to
intermarrying with them, I am not prepared for that."

"I think," said Louis, "that marrying and social equality among the
races will simply regulate itself. I do not think under the present
condition of things that there will be any general intermarrying of the
races, but this idea of rooted antagonism of races to me is all
moonshine. I believe that what you call the instincts of race are only
the prejudices which are the result of custom and education, and if
there is any instinct in the matter it is rather the instinct of nature
to make a Semi-tropical race in a Semi-tropical climate. Welland told me
that he had met his wife when she was a slave, that he loved her then,
and would have bought her had it been in his power, but now that freedom
had come to her he was glad to have the privilege of making her his
wife. He is an Englishman by birth and he intends taking her home with
him to England when a favorable opportunity presents itself. And that is
far more honorable and manly than living together after the old order of
things. I think," said Louis facing the floor "that a cruel wrong was
done to Minnie and myself when life was given to us under conditions
that doomed us to hopeless slavery, and from which we were rescued only
by good fortune. I have heard some colored persons boasting of the white
blood, but I always feel like blushing for mine. Much as my father did
for me he could never atone for giving me life under the conditions he
did."

"Never mind," said Minnie, "it all turned out for the best."

"Yes, Darling," said Louis, growing calmer, "for it gave me you. And
that was life's compensation. But the question of the intermingling of
the races in marriage is one that scarcely interests this question. The
question that presses upon us with the most fearful distinctness is how
can we make life secure in the South. I sometimes feel as if the very
air was busting with bayonets. There is no law here but the revolver.
There must be a screw loose somewhere, and this government that taxes
its men in peace and drafts them in war, ought to be wise enough to know
its citizens and strong enough to protect them."




Chapter XIX


But the pleasant home-life of Louis and Minnie was destined to be rudely
broken up. He began to receive threats and anonymous letters, such as
these: "Louis Lecroix, you are a doomed man. We are determined to
tolerate no scalawags, nor carpetbaggers among us. Beware, the sacred
serpent has hissed."

But Louis, brave and resolute, kept on the even tenor of his way,
although he never left his home without some forebodings that he tried
in vain to cast off. But his young wife being less in contact with the
brutal elements of society in that sin-cursed region, did not comprehend
the danger as Louis did, and yet she could not help feeling anxious for
her husband's safety.

They never parted without her looking after him with a sigh, and then
turning to her school, or whatever work or reading she had on her hand,
she would strive to suppress her heart's forebodings. But the storm
about to burst and to darken forever the sunshine of that home was
destined to fall on that fair young head.

Imperative business called Louis from home for one night. Minnie stood
at the door and said, "Louis, I hate to have you go. I have been feeling
so badly here lately, as if something was going to happen. Come home as
soon as you can."

"I will, darling," he said, kissing her tenderly again and again. "I do
feel rather loath to leave you, but death is every where, always lurking
in ambush. A man may escape from an earthquake to be strangled by a
hair. So, darling, keep in good spirits till I come."

Minnie stood at the door watching him till he was out of sight, and then
turning to her mother with a sigh, she said, "What a wretched state of
society. When he goes I never feel easy till he returns. I do wish we
had a government under which our lives would be just as safe as they
were in Pennsylvania."

Ellen felt very anxious, but she tried to hide her disquietude and keep
Minnie's spirits from sinking, and so she said, "This is a hard country.
We colored people have seen our hard times here."

"But, mother, don't you sometimes feel bitter towards these people, who
have treated you so unkindly?"

"No, Minnie; I used to, but I don't now. God says we must forgive, and
if we don't forgive, He won't forgive."

"But, mother, how did you get to feeling so?"

"Why, honey, I used to suffer until my heart was almost ready to burst,
but I learned to cast my burden on the Lord, and then my misery all
passed away. My burden fell off at the foot of the cross, and I felt
that my feet were planted on a rock."

"How wonderful," said Minnie, "is this faith! How real it is to them!
How near some of these suffering people have drawn to God!"

"Yes," said Ellen, "Mrs. Sumpter had a colored woman, to whom they were
real mean and cruel, and one day they whipped her and beat her on her
feet to keep her from running away; but she made up her mind to leave,
and so she packed up her clothes to run away. But before she started, I
believe she kneeled down and prayed, and asked what she should do, and
something reasoned with her and said, 'Stand still and see what I am
going to do for you,' and so she unpacked her clothes and stayed, and
now the best part of it was this, Milly's son had been away, and he
came back and brought with him money enough to buy his mother; for he
had been out begging money to buy her, and so Milly got free, and she
was mighty glad that she had stayed, because when he'd come back, if she
had been gone, he would not have known where to find her."

"Well, it is wonderful. Somehow these people have passed through the
darkness and laid their hands on God's robe of love and light, and have
been sustained. It seems to me that some things they see clearer through
their tears."

"Mother," said Minnie, "As it is Saturday I will visit some of my
scholars."

"Well, Minnie, I would; you look troubled, and may be you'll feel
better."

"Yes, Mother, I often feel strengthened after visiting some of these
good old souls, and getting glimpses into their inner life. I sometimes
ask them, after listening to the story of their past wrongs, what has
sustained you? What has kept you up? And the almost invariable answer
has been the power of God. Some of these poor old souls, who have been
turned adrift to shift for themselves, don't live by bread alone; they
live by bread and faith in God. I asked one of them a few days since,
Are you not afraid of starving? and the answer was, Not while God
lives."

After Minnie left, she visited a number of lowly cabins. The first one
she entered was the home of an industrious couple who were just making a
start in life. The room in which Minnie was, had no window-lights, only
an aperture that supplied them with light, but also admitted the cold.

"Why don't you have window-lights?" said Minnie.

"Oh we must crawl before we walk;" and yet even in this humble home they
had taken two orphan children of their race, and were giving them food
and shelter. And this kindness to the orphans of their race Minnie
found to be a very praiseworthy practice among some of those people who
were not poorer than themselves.

The next cabin she entered was very neat, though it bore evidences of
poverty. The woman, in referring to the past, told her how her child had
been taken away when it was about two years old, and how she had lost
all trace of him, and would not know him if he stood in her presence.

"How did you feel?" said Minnie.

"I felt as I was going to my grave, but I thought if I wouldn't get
justice here, I would get it in another world."

"My husband," said another, "asked if God is a just God, how would sich
as slavery be, and something answered and said, 'sich shan't always be,'
and you couldn't beat it out of my husband's head that the Spirit didn't
speak to him."

And thus the morning waned away, and Minnie returned calmer than when
she had left. A holy peace stole over her mind. She felt that for high
and low, rich and poor, there was a common refuge. That there was no
corner so dark that the light of heaven could not shine through, and
that these people in their ignorance and simplicity had learned to look
upon God as a friend coming near to them in their sorrows, and taking
cognizance of their wants and woes.

Minnie loved to listen to these beautiful stories of faith and trust. To
her they were grand inspirations to faith and duty. Sometimes Minnie
would think, when listening to some dear aged saint, I can't teach these
people religion, I must learn from them.

Refreshed and strengthened she returned home and began to work upon a
dress for a destitute and orphaned child, and when night came she
retired quite early, being somewhat wearied with her day's work.

During his absence Louis had been among the freedmen in a new
settlement where he had lately established a school, where,
notwithstanding all their disadvantages, he was pleased to see evidences
of growth and progress.

There was an earnestness and growing manliness that commanded his
respect. They were beginning to learn the power of combination, and gave
but little heed to the cajoling words, "We are your best friends."

"Don't you think," Louis said to an intelligent freedman, "that the
rebels are your best friends?"

"I'll think so when I lose my senses."

"But you are ignorant," Louis said to another one. "How will you know
whom to vote for?"

"Well if I don't, I know how not to vote for a rebel."

"How do you know you didn't vote for a rebel?" said Louis to another one
who came from one of the most benighted districts.

"I voted for one of my own color," as if treason and a black skin were
incompatible.

In the evening Louis called the people together, and talked with them,
trying to keep them from being discouraged, for the times were evil, and
the days were very gloomy. The impeachment had failed. State after State
in the North had voted against enfranchising the colored man in their
midst. The spirit of the lost cause revived, murders multiplied. The Ku
Klux spread terror and death around. Every item of Northern meanness to
the colored people in their midst was a message of hope to the rebel
element of the South, which had only changed. Ballot and bullet had
failed, but another resort was found in secret assassination. Men
advocating equal rights did so at the peril of their lives, for violence
and murder were rampant in the land. Oh those dark and weary days when
politicians were flattering for place and murdered Union men were
sleeping in their bloody shrouds. Louis' courage did not desert him, and
he tried to nerve the hearts of those that were sinking with fear in
those days of gloom and terror. His advice to the people was, "Defend
your firesides if they are invaded, live as peaceably as you can, spare
no pains to educate your children, be saving and industrious, try to get
land under your feet and homes over your heads. My faith is very strong
in political parties, but, as the world has outgrown other forms of
wrong, I believe that it will outgrow this also. We must trust and hope
for better things." What else could he say? And yet there were times when
his words seemed to him almost like bitter mockery. Here was outrage
upon outrage committed upon these people, and to tell them to hope and
wait for better times, but seemed like speaking hollow words. Oh he
longed for a central administration strong enough to put down violence
and misrule in the South. If Johnson was clasping hands with rebels and
traitors was there no power in Congress to give, at least, security to
life? Must they wait till murder was organized into an institution, and
life and property were at the mercy of the mob? And, if so, would not
such a government be a farce, and such a civilization a failure?

With these reflections passing through his mind he fell asleep, but his
slumber was restless and disturbed. He dreamed (but it seemed so plain
to him, that he thought it was hardly a dream,) that Minnie came to his
side and pressed her lips to his, but they were very pale and very cold.
He reached out his hand to clasp her, but she was gone, but as she
vanished he heard her say, "My husband."

Restless and uneasy he arose; there was a strange feeling around his
soul, a great sinking and depression of his spirits. He could not
account for his feelings. He arose and walked the floor and looked up at
the heavens, but the night was very bright and beautiful, still he could
not shake off his strange and sad forebodings, and as soon as it was
light he started for home.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Installment missing.]




Chapter XX


In the afternoon when the body had been prepared for the grave, the
sorrowing friends gathered around, tearfully noting the look of peace
and rest which had stolen over the pale, dead face, when all traces of
the death agony had passed away by the contraction of the muscles.

"That is just the way she looked yesterday," said a sad-eyed woman,
whose face showed traces of a deep "and fearful sorrow."

Louis drew near, for he was eager to hear any word that told him of
Minnie before death had robbed her of life, and him of peace. He came
near enough to hear, but not to interrupt the conversation.

"She was at my house yesterday, trying to comfort me, when I was telling
her how these Secesh used to _cruelize_ us."

"I was telling her about my poor daughter Amy, and what a sprightly,
pert piece she was, and how dem awful Secesh took my poor chile and
hung'd her."

"Hung'd? Aunt Susan, Oh how was dat?" said half a dozen voices.

"Well, you see it was jist dis way. My darter Amy was a mighty nice
chile, and Massa could truss her wid any ting. So when de Linkum Sogers
had gone through dis place, Massa got her to move some of his tings over
to another place. Now when Amy seed de sojers had cum'd through she was
mighty glad, and she said in a kine of childish way, 'I'se so glad, I'm
gwine to marry a Linkum soger, and set up house-keeping for myself.' I
don't spect she wer in arnest 'bout marrying de sojer, but she did want
her freedom. Well, no body couldn't blame her for dat, for freedom's a
mighty good thing."

"I don't like it, I jist loves it," said one of Aunt Sue's auditors.

"And I does too, 'cause I'd rather live on bread and water than be back
again in de old place, but go on, Aunt Susan."

"Well, when she said dat, dat miserable old Heston----"

"Heston, I know dat wretch, I bound de debil's waiting for him now, got
his pitch fork all ready."

"Well, he had my poor girl tookened up, and poor chile, she was beat
shameful, and den dey had her up before der sogers and had her tried for
saying 'cendiary words, and den dey had my poor girl hung'd." And the
poor old woman bowed her head and rocked her body to and fro.

"Well," she continued after a moment's pause, "I was telling dat sweet
angel dere my trouble, and she was mighty sorry, and sat dere and cried,
and den she said, 'Mrs. Thomas, I hope in a better world dat you'll see
a joy according to all the days wherein you have seen sorrow!' Bless her
sweet heart, she's got in de shining gate afore me, but I bound to meet
her on de sunny banks of deliberance.

"And she was at my house yesterday," said another. "She cum'd to see if
I wanted any ting, and I tell'd her I would like to hab a little
flannel, 'cause I had the rheumatiz so bad, and she said I should hab
it. Den she asked me if I didn't like freedom best. I told her I would
rather live in a corn crib, and so I would. It is hard getting along,
but I hopes for better times. And den she took down de Bible, and read
wid dat sweet voice of hers, about de eagle stirring up her nest, and
den she said when de old eagle wanted her young to fly she broked up de
nest, and de little eagles didn't known what was de matter, but some how
dey didn't feel so cumfertable, 'cause de little twigs and sticks stuck
in 'em, and den dey would work dere wings, and dat was de way she said
we must do; de ole nest of slavery was broke up, but she said we mus'n't
get discouraged, but we must plume our wings for higher flying. Oh she
did tell it so purty. I wish I could say it like she did, it did my
heart so much good. Poor thing, she done gone and folded her wing in de
hebenly mansion. I wish I was 'long side of her, but I'se bound to meet
her, 'cause I'm gwine to set out afresh for heben and 'ternal glory."

And thus did these stricken children of sorrow unconsciously comfort the
desolate and almost breaking heart of Louis Lacroix. And their words of
love and hope were like rays of light shimmering amid the gloomy shadows
that overhung his suddenly darkened life.

Surely, thought Louis, if the blessings and tears of the poor and needy
and the prayers of him who was ready to perish would crystalize a path
to the glory-land, then Minnie's exit from earth must have been over a
bridge of light, above whose radiant arches hovering angels would
delight to bend.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, a knock was heard at
the door, and Louis rose to open it, and then he saw a sight which shook
all his gathered firmness to tears. Headed by the eldest of Minnie's
scholars came a procession of children, each one bearing a bunch of
fairest and brightest flowers to spread around the couch of their
beloved teacher. Some kissed her, and others threw themselves beside the
corpse and wept bitter, burning tears. All shared in Louis' grief, for
all had lost a dear, good friend and loving instructor.

Louis summoned all the energies of his soul to bear his mournful loss.
It was his task to bow to the Chastener, and let his loved one go,
feeling that when he had laid her in the earth that he left her there in
the hope of a better resurrection.

Life with its solemn responsibilities still met him; its earnest duties
still confronted him, and, though he sometimes felt like a weary watcher
at the gates of death, longing to catch a glimpse of her shining robes
and the radiant light of her glorified face, yet her knew it was his
work to labor and to wait.

Sorrow and danger still surrounded his way, and he felt his soul more
strongly drawn out than ever to share the fortunes of the colored race.
He felt there were grand possibilities stored up in their future. The
name of the negro had been associated with slavery, ignorance and
poverty, and he determined as far as his influence could be exerted to
lift that name from the dust of the centuries and place it among the
most honored names in the history of the human race.

He still remained in the South, for Minnie's grave had made the South to
him a sacred place, a place in which to labor and to wait until peace
like bright dew should descend where carnage had spread ruin around, and
freedom and justice, like glorified angels, should reign triumphant
where violence and slavery had held their fearful carnival of shame and
crime for ages. Earnestly he set himself to bring around the hour when

  Peace, white-robed and pure, should move
    O'er rifts of ruin deep and wide,
  When her hands should span with lasting love
    The chasms rent by hate and pride.

And he was blessed in his labors of love and faith.




Conclusion


And now, in conclusion, may I not ask the indulgence of my readers for a
few moments, simply to say that Louis and Minnie are only ideal beings,
touched here and there with a coloring from real life?

But while I confess (not wishing to mis-represent the most lawless of
the Ku-Klux) that Minnie has only lived and died in my imagination, may
I not modestly ask that the lesson of Minnie shall have its place among
the educational ideas for the advancement of our race?

The greatest want of our people, if I understand our wants aright, is
not simply wealth, nor genius, nor mere intelligence, but live men, and
earnest, lovely women, whose lives shall represent not a "stagnant mass,
but a living force."

We have wealth among us, but how much of it is ever spent in building up
the future of the race? in encouraging talent, and developing genius? We
have intelligence, but how much do we add to the reservoir of the
world's thought? We have genius among us, but how much can it rely upon
the colored race for support?

Take even the _Christian Recorder_; where are the graduates from
colleges and high school whose pens and brains lend beauty, strength,
grace and culture to its pages?

If, when their school days are over, the last composition shall have
been given at the examination, will not the disused faculties revenge
themselves by rusting? If I could say it without being officious and
intrusive, I would say to some who are about to graduate this year, do
not feel that your education is finished, when the diploma of your
institution is in your hands. Look upon the knowledge you have gained
only as a stepping stone to a future, which you are determined shall
grandly contrast with the past.

While some of the authors of the present day have been weaving their
stories about white men marrying beautiful quadroon girls, who, in so
doing were lost to us socially, I conceived of one of that same class to
whom I gave a higher, holier destiny; a life of lofty self-sacrifice and
beautiful self-consecration, finished at the post of duty, and rounded
off with the fiery crown of martyrdom, a circlet which ever changes into
a diadem of glory.

The lesson of Minnie's sacrifice is this, that it is braver to suffer
with one's own branch of the human race,--to feel, that the weaker and
the more despised they are, the closer we will cling to them, for the
sake of helping them, than to attempt to creep out of all identity with
them in their feebleness, for the sake of mere personal advantages, and
to do this at the expense of self-respect, and a true manhood, and a
truly dignified womanhood, that with whatever gifts we possess, whether
they be genius, culture, wealth or social position, we can best serve
the interests of our race by a generous and loving diffusion, than by a
narrow and selfish isolation which, after all, is only one type of the
barbarous and anti-social state.




Notes

1. The following two paragraphs are for the most part illegible. I have
reproduced below as much of the text as can be deciphered.

  The whole South is in a state of excitement [     ...     ]
[                                                   ] nurture
[                                                   ] and re-
[                                                      ] high
[                                                    ] be for
[   ] they are [   ] and only remember they are rebels[?   ].

  They [urge the         agenda?] and their brothers in their
[mistaken?] folly. Like the women of Carthage [     ] ancient
and magnificent city was [                                  ]
they were ready to sacrifice their [                 ] and if
need be would have cut [                 but it have been] so
dear to their hearts [                                      ]

2. The original reads "Josiah."

3. The original reads "Joseph."

4. The original reads "Josiah."

5. The original reads "Josiah."

6. The original reads "Anna."

7. The original reads "Minnie."





End of Project Gutenberg's Minnie's Sacrifice, by Frances Ellen Watkins Harper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINNIE'S SACRIFICE ***

***** This file should be named 11053.txt or 11053.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/0/5/11053/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Andrea Ball and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

